AFGHANISTAN
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Head of state and government: Mohammad Ashraf
Ghani
The intensifying conflict resulted in
widespread human rights violations and
abuses. Thousands of civilians were killed,
injured or displaced in the violence, while
ongoing insecurity restricted access to
education, health and other services. While
armed insurgent groups were responsible for
the majority of civilian casualties, pro-
government forces also killed and injured
civilians. Anti- and pro-government forces
continued to use children as fighters. The
number of people internally displaced stood
at 1.4 million – more than double the
number in 2013 – while approximately
2.6 million Afghan refugees lived outside
the country, many in deplorable conditions.
Violence against women and girls persisted,
and there was a reported increase in armed
groups publicly punishing women including
through executions and lashings. State and
non-state actors continued to threaten
human rights defenders and impede them
from carrying out their work and journalists
encountered violence and censorship. The
government continued to carry out
executions, often after unfair trials.
BACKGROUND
In January, officials from Afghanistan,
Pakistan, China and the USA held talks on a
roadmap for peace with the Taliban.
However, at a conference in January in Doha,
attended by 55 senior participants from a
diverse international range of backgrounds,
including the Taliban, a delegation of the
Taliban’s political commission based in Doha
reiterated that a formal peace process could
start only after foreign troops had left the
country. They also set out other preconditions
including the removal of Taliban leaders’
names from the UN sanctions list.
58
In February, President Ghani appointed
Mohammad Farid Hamidi, a prominent
human rights lawyer, as Attorney General,
and General Taj Mohammad Jahid as
Minister of Interior Affairs. President Ghani
opened a fund to support women survivors of
gender-based violence, to which cabinet
members contributed 15% of their
February salary.
In March, the UN Security Council
renewed the mandate of the UN Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for another
year; the UN Secretary-General appointed
Tadamichi Yamamoto as Special
Representative of UNAMA.
After years of peace negotiations between
the government and the country’s second
largest insurgent group Hezb-i-Islami, led by
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, on 29 September,
President Ghani and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar
signed a peace agreement granting
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and his fighters
amnesty for alleged crimes under
international law and permitting the release of
certain Hezb-i-Islami prisoners.
Political instability increased amid growing
rifts in the Government of National Unity
between supporters of President Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. In
October, an international aid donor
conference was held by the EU to pledge aid
to Afghanistan over the next four years. The
international community pledged around
US$15.2 billion to assist Afghanistan in areas
including security and sustainable
development. Shortly before the conference,
the EU and Afghanistan signed a deal
permitting the deportation of an unlimited
number of failed Afghan asylum-seekers,
despite the worsening security situation.
There were serious concerns about a
mounting financial crisis as the international
presence within the country was diminished
and unemployment rose.
There was a rapid increase in September
and October of Taliban attacks and attempts
to capture large provinces and cities. In
October, the Taliban captured Kunduz,
during which the city power supply and water
was cut; hospitals ran out of medication and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17civilian casualty numbers rose. The UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (UNOCHA) reported some 25,000
Afghans internally displaced during one week
from Kunduz to the capital, Kabul, and
neighbouring countries.
ARMED CONFLICT
In the first nine months of 2016, UNAMA
documented 8,397 conflict-related civilian
casualties (2,562 deaths and 5,835 injured).
Pro-government forces – including Afghan
national security forces, the Afghan local
police, pro-government armed groups, and
international military forces – were
responsible for almost 23%, according
to UNAMA.
UNAMA documented at least 15 incidents
in the first half of 2016 in which pro-
government forces conducted search
operations in hospitals and clinics, delayed or
impeded the provision of medical supplies, or
used health facilities for military purposes.
This was a sharp increase on the
previous year.
Men dressed in Afghan National Army
uniforms entered a health clinic in the
Taliban-controlled village of Tangi Saidan,
Wardak province, on 18 February. The
Swedish aid group that ran the clinic said the
men beat staff members and killed two
patients and a 15-year-old carer. NATO
launched an investigation into the incident;
no updates were made public by the end of
the year.
No criminal charges were brought against
those responsible for an air strike by US
forces in October 2015 against a Médecins
Sans Frontières hospital in Kunduz which
killed and injured at least 42 staff and
patients, although approximately 12 US
military personnel faced disciplinary
sanctions. In March, the new commander of
US and NATO forces in Afghanistan issued
an apology to the families of the victims.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
The Taliban and other armed insurgent
groups were responsible for the majority of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
civilian casualties, approximately 60%,
according to UNAMA.
On 3 February, the Taliban shot dead a 10-
year-old boy on his way to school in Tirin Kot,
southern Uruzgan. It was believed that the
boy was shot because he had fought the
Taliban on earlier occasions alongside his
uncle, a former Taliban commander who
switched allegiance and became a local
police commander.
On 19 April, Taliban militants attacked a
security team responsible for protecting high-
level government officials in Kabul, killing at
least 64 people and wounding 347. It was the
biggest Taliban attack on an urban area
since 2001.
On 31 May, Taliban militants posing as
government officials kidnapped around 220
civilians at a fake checkpoint along the
Kunduz-Takhar highway near Arzaq Angor
Bagh in Kunduz province. They killed 17 of
the civilians and the rest were eventually
rescued or released. At least 40 more people
were kidnapped and others killed in the same
area on 8 June.
On 23 July, a suicide attack claimed by the
armed group Islamic State (IS) killed at least
80 people and wounded more than 230
during a peaceful demonstration by members
of the Hazara minority in Kabul.
In August, three armed men attacked the
American University in Kabul, killing 12
people and injuring nearly 40, mostly
students and teachers. No one claimed
responsibility for the attack.
On 11 October, IS conducted a co-
ordinated attack against a large group of
mourners in a Shi’a mosque in Kabul. The
attackers used explosive materials and
stormed the mosque, reportedly taking
hostage hundreds of mourners. At least 18
people were shot dead and over 40 injured,
including women and children.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Afghan judiciary said that it had
registered more than 3,700 cases of violence
against women and girls in the first eight
months of 2016. The Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission also
59reported thousands of cases in the first six
months of the year, including beatings,
killings and acid attacks.
In January, a man cut off the nose of his
22-year-old wife in Faryab. The incident was
condemned across Afghanistan, including by
a Taliban spokesperson.
In July, a 14-year-old pregnant girl was set
on fire by her husband and her parents-in-
law to punish her father for eloping with a
cousin of the girl’s husband. She died five
days later in hospital in Kabul.
Armed groups targeted women working in
public life, including women police officers.
Armed groups also restricted the freedom of
movement of women and girls, including
their access to education and health care, in
areas under their control.
UNAMA reported an increase in the
number of women punished in public under
Shari’a law by the Taliban and other armed
groups. Between 1 January and 30 June,
UNAMA documented six parallel justice
punishments by armed groups of women
accused of so-called “moral crimes”,
including the executions of two women and
the lashing of four others.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, approximately 2.6 million Afghan
refugees were living in more than 70
countries, making them the second largest
refugee population worldwide. Around 95%
lived in just two countries, Iran and Pakistan,
where they faced discrimination, racial
attacks, lack of basic amenities and the risk
of mass deportation.
Approximately 1.4 million refugees in
Pakistan risked mass deportation with their
registration tentatively expiring at the end of
the year. UNHCR estimated that a further
one million undocumented refugees were in
Pakistan. According to UNHCR, more than
500,000 Afghan refugees (documented and
undocumented) were repatriated from
Pakistan during the year. This was the
highest number since 2002. Officials
reported up to 5,000 returnees during each
60
of the first four days of October. The situation
was intensified with the deal signed between
the Afghan government and the EU on 5
October 2016, agreeing to the unlimited
return of Afghan refugees from EU member
states.
Internally displaced people
By September 2016, the number of people
internally displaced reached an estimated 1.4
million. Many continued to live in squalid
conditions without access to adequate
housing, food, water, health care, education
or employment opportunities.
According to UNOCHA, from 1 January to
11 December, 530,000 individuals became
internally displaced mainly due to conflict.
The situation facing internally displaced
people (IDPs) has worsened in recent years.
A national IDP policy launched in 2014 was
hindered by corruption, lack of capacity in
the government and fading international
interest.
IDPs, along with other groups, faced
significant challenges in accessing health
care. Public facilities remained severely
overstretched, and IDP camps and
settlements often lacked dedicated clinics.
Medicines and private clinics were
unaffordable for most IDPs and the lack of
adequate maternal and reproductive health
care was a particular area of concern.
IDPs also faced repeated threats of forced
evictions by both government and private
actors.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Armed groups continued to target and
threaten human rights defenders. Women
human rights defenders in particular faced
death threats against themselves and their
families.
In early 2016, a prominent human rights
defender received a death threat via
Facebook from the Taliban against himself
and nine others. After the 10 activists
approached the authorities about the threat,
the intelligence agency National Directorate
of Security arrested two people with reported
links to the Taliban, but no subsequent
Amnesty International Report 2016/17information was provided to the human rights
defenders. Threats continued against the
activists, who self-censored their human
rights work as a result.
In August, the brother of a local women’s
rights activist in a southern province was
kidnapped, tortured and subsequently killed
by unidentified individuals. The perpetrators
used the man’s phone to intimidate the
activist and her family, threatening her with
fatal repercussions if she did not cease her
human rights work. No one had been
arrested for the kidnapping and killing by
the end of the year.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
Freedom of expression, which strengthened
after the fall of the Taliban in 2001, has
steadily eroded following a string of violent
attacks, intimidation and killings of
journalists.
Nai, a media freedom watchdog, reported
more than 100 cases of attacks against
journalists, media workers and media offices
between January and November. These
included killings, beatings, detention, arson,
threats and other forms of violence by both
state and non-state actors.
On 20 January, a suicide attack on a
shuttle bus carrying staff working for Moby
Group, the owner of the country’s largest
private TV station Tolo TV, killed seven media
workers and injured 27 people. The Taliban,
which had previously threatened Tolo TV,
claimed responsibility.
On 29 January, Zubair Khaksar, a well-
known journalist working for Afghan national
TV in Nangarhar province, was killed by
unidentified armed men while travelling from
Jalalabad city to Surkhrood district.
On 19 April, police in Kabul beat two staff
media workers of Ariana TV while they were
carrying out their reporting duties.
Activists in several provinces outside Kabul
said they were increasingly reluctant to stage
demonstrations, fearing reprisals from
government officials.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Armed groups including the Taliban
continued to carry out killings, torture and
other human rights abuses as punishment for
perceived crimes or offences. Parallel justice
structures were illegal.
Between 1 January and 30 June, UNAMA
documented 26 cases including summary
killings, lashings, beatings and illegal
detention. The punishments were imposed
for alleged violations of Shari’a law, spying or
connections with the security forces. Most
occurred in the western region, particularly in
Farah and Badghis provinces.
On 14 February, Afghanistan Local Police
in Khak-e-Safid district, Farah province,
allegedly detained, tortured and killed a
shepherd for his alleged involvement in
planting a remote-controlled IED (improvised
explosive device) that killed two police
officers. UNAMA reported that, although it
was aware of the incident, the Afghan
National Police prosecution office did
not initiate any investigation or arrest any
suspects.
DEATH PENALTY
On 8 May, six death row prisoners
were executed by hanging in Pol-e Charkhi
prison in Kabul. The executions followed a
speech by President Ghani on 25 April, soon
after the large-scale Taliban attack of 19
April, in which he vowed to implement tough
justice, including capital punishment.
It was feared that more executions could
follow. Approximately 600 prisoners remained
on death row, many convicted of crimes such
as murder. Many of their trials did not abide
by fair trial standards. Around 100 individuals
were sentenced to death during the year for
crimes including murder, rape and murder,
and terrorism resulting in mass killings.
61ALBANIA
Republic of Albania
Head of state: Bujar Nishani
Head of government: Edi Rama
Roma and Egyptian communities continued
to live in poor housing conditions and were
at risk of forced evictions. Over 20,000
Albanians sought asylum in the EU.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The authorities made no progress in bringing
to justice those responsible for the enforced
disappearance in 1995 of Remzi Hoxha, an
ethnic Albanian from Macedonia. His fate
and whereabouts remained unknown.
The government started to co-operate with
the International Commission on Missing
Persons to locate and identify the remains of
Albanians forcibly disappeared under the
communist governments between 1944 and
1991; however, by the end of 2016, new
exhumations were yet to be carried out. An
estimated 6,000 persons remained
disappeared.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTIONS
In June, the local authorities in Tirana
threatened to forcibly evict over 80 families −
mainly Roma and Egyptian − living in the
area of Bregu i Lumit, an area at risk of being
flooded by the Tirana River. The authorities
failed to provide adequate notice, genuine
consultation and alternative housing.
Following the intervention by housing activists
and the Albanian Ombudsperson, evictions
were temporarily suspended at the end of
September. As part of an “intervention plan”,
proposed by the Mayor of Tirana, the families
were given options on their eviction and
resettlement. By the end of the year, it
remained unclear if all families would be able
to access resettlement and if the offered
alternatives were adequate and sustainable.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
In June, a judge suspended the chief of the
national police for abuse of power and
62
participation in planting wiretapping devices
in police stations. In response, the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs
accused the judge of serving the opposition
and undermining the independence of the
judiciary. The national police chief remained
in pre-trial detention at the end of the year.
In July, a justice reform was passed in
Parliament. The reform amended dozens of
articles of the Constitution and introduced
new legislation to ensure the independence
and impartiality of the judiciary and to
prevent political intervention and corruption.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Over 1,000 asylum applications were
submitted to the authorities as border
closures in Greece and Macedonia prompted
people to seek protection in Albania. Some
refugees and migrants arriving from Greece
were summarily returned.
An estimated 20,000 Albanians applied for
asylum in EU countries, the majority of them
in Germany, but most of them were rejected.
In July, the European Parliament proposed
an EU common list of “safe countries of
origin” to process asylum applications. The
list included Albania. This raised concerns
about fair and individualized asylum
processes for Albanians.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Prisons
In March, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture (CPT) expressed
concerns over detention conditions in
Albania. The CPT documented numerous
reports by detainees – including juveniles – of
ill-treatment by police officers, in some cases
amounting to torture. It also noted that
detention conditions remained poor in several
locations across the country, and that
progress was lacking in health care, activities
and specialized care provided to prisoners.
Children’s rights
In May, the torture or other ill-treatment of
children, including sexual abuse of girls, in
an orphanage in the town of Shkodra, caused
a national scandal after the district
Amnesty International Report 2016/17prosecutor revealed the scale of the abuse.
Five persons, including the former director of
the orphanage, were arrested.
ALGERIA other ill-treatment, counter-terrorism,
enforced disappearance and freedoms of
association and peaceful assembly. The
authorities also continued to prevent
international organizations, including
Amnesty International, from conducting
human rights fact-finding visits.
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria
Head of state: Abdelaziz Bouteflika
Head of government: Abdelmalek Sellal FREEDOMS OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to restrict the
rights to freedom of expression, association,
assembly and religion, and prosecuted
peaceful critics, including human rights
defenders, in unfair trials. Refugees and
migrants were arbitrarily expelled. Impunity
for past serious abuses continued to prevail.
Courts handed down death sentences; no
executions were carried out.
BACKGROUND
In January, the government dissolved the
Department for Information and Security
(DRS), the main security agency previously
associated with torture and other ill-treatment
of detainees. It was replaced with a Security
Services Directorate that reports directly to
the President.
Also in January, changes to the Code of
Criminal Procedure came into effect,
including new witness protection measures,
limits to the right to appeal in minor offence
cases and amendments allowing suspects to
contact lawyers immediately when they are
taken into police custody. The changes did
not give suspects the right to have their
lawyer present during interrogation.
Constitutional amendments adopted in
February included the creation of a National
Human Rights Council to replace the
National Consultative Commission for
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights.
Other amendments included making
Tamazight a national language, thus
enhancing the cultural rights of the Amazigh
population. 1
The authorities continued to block access
to Algeria by UN human rights mechanisms,
including those with mandates on torture and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
The authorities continued to leave many civil
society associations, including Amnesty
International Algeria, in legal limbo by failing
to acknowledge their registration applications.
Such applications were required under Law
12-06 on associations, which imposed wide-
ranging arbitrary restrictions on associations
and exposed members of unrecognized
associations to up to six months’
imprisonment and fines.
The authorities tightly restricted freedom of
assembly, maintaining a ban on all
demonstrations in the capital, Algiers, under
a decree from 2001, and arresting and
prosecuting peaceful protesters.
In January a court in Tamanrasset
imposed fines and one-year prison sentences
on seven peaceful protesters convicted of
“unarmed gathering” and “offending public
institutions” for protesting in December 2015
about a local land dispute. Six of the seven
protesters were released in July under a
presidential pardon. The seventh, activist
Dahmane Kerami, remained in prison serving
a one-year sentence in a separate case. He
was convicted of participating in “unarmed
gatherings” and “obstructing traffic” during
peaceful protests in Tamanrasset in 2015
against shale gas fracking and in support of
workers laid off by a local gold mining
company. He was released on 31 December
after serving his sentence. 2
In March, a court sentenced activist
Abdelali Ghellam to one year in prison and a
fine after convicting him of inciting others to
participate in an “unarmed gathering” and
“obstruct traffic”. The charges related to
comments about the protest in Tamanrasset
that he published on Facebook. He was
released in April.
63FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The authorities prosecuted peaceful critics
and forced the closure of media outlets.
In March, a court in Tlemcen convicted
and fined Zoulikha Belarbi, a member of the
Algerian League for the Defence of Human
Rights (LADDH), for defamation and for
“offending” the President and a public body.
The charges related to her publishing a
satirical collage on Facebook depicting
President Bouteflika and senior officials. A
six-month prison term was added to her
sentence on appeal in December.
In June, the authorities arrested the
director and the producer of the private
Khabar Broadcasting Corporation and a
Ministry of Communication official in
connection with two popular satirical current
affairs programmes. The three were detained
for several weeks before a court sentenced
them to suspended prison terms of between
six months and one year for licensing
irregularities. Gendarmes sealed the
recording studios in July, forcing both shows
off the air. 3
In July, a court sentenced freelance
journalist Mohamed Tamalt to two years’
imprisonment after convicting him of
“offending” the President and public
institutions in comments he published on
Facebook and in his blog about corruption
and nepotism among leading officials. An
appeal court confirmed his sentence in
August, following a hearing at which he
accused prison guards of beating him. He
began a protest hunger strike at the time of
his arrest in June, became comatose in
August, and died in hospital in December.
The authorities failed to adequately
investigate his alleged beating in detention,
his treatment in prison and his death. 4
In November, a court in El Bayadh
sentenced Hassan Bouras, a journalist and
human rights activist, to one year in prison on
charges of complicity in offending public
officials and a public body after a private
television station broadcast film of him
interviewing three people alleging police and
judicial corruption. 5 From June onwards, the authorities targeted
members of the Ahmadi Muslim community,
arresting more than 50 in Blida and Skikda
provinces and other parts of the country on
account of their faith, according to media
reports and civil society groups. Soon after
the June arrests in Blida, the Minister of
Religious Affairs publicly accused Ahmadis of
“extremism” and of serving foreign interests.
In November, a court in Skikda sentenced 20
Ahmadis to fines and prison terms ranging
from one month to one year; at the end of the
year they remained at liberty pending appeal.
In August, a court sentenced Christian
convert Slimane Bouhafs from Setif to five
years in prison for “denigrating” Islam and
“insulting” the Prophet Muhammad in
comments he posted on Facebook. An
appeal court reduced the sentence to three
years’ imprisonment. 6
64
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities harassed and prosecuted
human rights defenders. In March, a court in
Ghardaia charged lawyer Noureddine
Ahmine with “insulting a public institution”
and falsely reporting an offence, in relation to
a complaint of torture that he had filed,
apparently on behalf of a client, in 2014.
Noureddine Ahmine had defended many
protesters and journalists facing charges
arising from their peaceful exercise of their
human rights.
In June, an investigative judge in Ghardaia
issued an arrest warrant against lawyer Salah
Dabouz, a member of LADDH, in relation to
comments he made about unrest in Ghardaia
and for allegedly taking a computer and
camera into a prison.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Dozens of people arrested in connection with
communal violence in 2015 in the Mzab
region remained in pre-trial detention
throughout 2016 as the authorities
investigated them on charges of terrorism
and inciting hatred. They included political
Amnesty International Report 2016/17activist Kameleddine Fekhar and other
supporters of regional autonomy.
In March the UN Human Rights
Committee found that Algeria had violated
Articles 2, 7 and 9 of the ICCPR. Its findings
related to the failure to investigate allegations
by businessman Mejdoub Chani that DRS
officers had detained him incommunicado
and tortured him during interrogation
following his arrest for corruption and money
laundering in 2009. He remained in prison at
the end of the year awaiting the outcome of
appeals to the Supreme Court.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
the security forces killed 125 alleged
members of armed groups but disclosed few
details, raising concern that some may have
been extrajudicially executed.
In March, the armed group calling itself al-
Qa’ida in the Islamic Maghreb claimed
responsibility for a rocket attack on a gas
production site in Khrechba. No casualties
were reported.
IMPUNITY
The government continued to allow impunity
for serious human rights abuses committed
during the 1990s, by failing to investigate
past abuses and hold those responsible to
account. The unlawful killings, enforced
disappearances, rape and other torture
committed by the security forces, as well as
some abuses committed by armed groups,
may amount to crimes against humanity. 7
The Family Code continued to discriminate
against women in matters of marriage,
divorce, child custody and guardianship, and
inheritance. Women and girls remained
inadequately protected against gender-based
violence in the absence of a comprehensive
law. The Penal Code continued to prohibit
rape without defining it or explicitly
recognizing marital rape as a crime, and
allowed men who rape girls under the age of
18 to escape trial by marrying their victim.
The Penal Code also continued to criminalize
abortions. 1. Algeria: Constitution needs stronger human rights safeguards (MDE
28/3366/2016)
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS 2. Algeria: Further information: Six protesters released, one remains
imprisoned (MDE 28/4437/2016)
The government again failed to enact
legislation protecting the right to asylum.
Clashes between local residents and
migrants from sub-Saharan Africa occurred
in Bechar and Ouargla in March, in
Tamanrasset in July, and in Algiers in
November.
In December, security forces arrested an
estimated 1,500 sub-Saharan African
migrants and refugees in Algiers, and
arbitrarily expelled hundreds of them to
neighbouring Niger within days. Those not
expelled were released in the southern city of
Tamanrasset and reported being barred from
public transport to prevent them returning to
Algiers.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Security forces and armed opposition groups
clashed in several areas. The authorities said
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to impose death sentences.
No executions have been carried out since
1993.
3. Algeria: End media restrictions (MDE 28/4369/2016)
4. Algeria: Further information: Health concern for British-Algerian
journalist: Mohamed Tamalt (MDE 28/4738/2016)
5. Algeria: One year in prison for denouncing corruption: Hassan Bouras
(MDE 28/5299/2016)
6. Algeria: Further information: Prisoner of conscience remains in
detention: Slimane Bouhafs (MDE 28/4783/2016)
7. Algeria: Time to end impunity for past and present abuses (MDE
28/3521/2016)
ANGOLA
Republic of Angola
Head of state and government: José Eduardo dos
Santos
The worsening economic crisis triggered
price rises for food, health care, fuel,
recreation and culture. This led to
65continued demonstrations expressing
discontent and restrictions on the rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly. The government
misused the justice system and other state
institutions to silence dissent. Housing
rights and the right to health were violated.
BACKGROUND
The drop in the price of oil put Angola’s oil-
dependent economy under severe pressure,
prompting the government to cut the budget
by 20% and seek support from the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). In July,
the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (CESCR) expressed concern
at regressive austerity measures by the state,
including insufficient allocation of resources
to the health sector.
On 2 June, President José Eduardo dos
Santos appointed his daughter Isabel dos
Santos as head of the state oil company
Sonangol, the biggest source of state revenue
and central to an extensive system of
patronage.
In August, the ruling People’s Movement
for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) re-
elected José Eduardo dos Santos as its leader
for a further five years, even though in March
he had announced his intention to step down
from politics in 2018. He has been President
since 1979.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Politically motivated trials, criminal
defamation charges and national security
laws continued to be used to suppress
human rights defenders, dissent and other
critical voices. The acquittal of human rights
defenders and release of prisoners of
conscience were positive steps, but the gains
remained fragile without structural legislative
reform and full commitment to international
human rights law and standards.
Prisoners of conscience
On 28 March, 17 youth activists known as
the Angola 17 were convicted of “preparatory
acts of rebellion” and “criminal conspiracy”.
They were sentenced to prison terms ranging
66
from two years and three months to eight and
a half years, fined 50,000 kwanzas (US$300)
for court costs and jailed. The security forces
had arrested and detained 15 of the activists
between 20 and 24 June 2015 in the capital,
Luanda, after they attended a meeting to
discuss political issues and governance
concerns in the country. The two others, both
women, were also charged, but only detained
after sentencing. Immediately after the
convictions, the activists’ lawyers lodged two
appeals – one before the Supreme Tribunal
and the other before the Constitutional Court.
They also lodged a writ for habeas corpus,
which was heard by the Supreme Tribunal on
29 June: the Tribunal ordered the conditional
release of the 17 activists pending a final
decision on their case.
On 20 July, the National Assembly
approved an amnesty law relating to crimes
committed up to 11 November 2015,
including the Angola 17 case. Some of the 17
stated that as they had committed no crime
they did not want to be granted amnesty. The
17 were prisoners of conscience, imprisoned
and convicted solely for the peaceful exercise
of their rights.
Two youth activists were punished for
criticizing proceedings during the trial. On 8
March, Manuel Chivonde Nito Alves, one of
the Angola 17, said out loud in court, “This
trial is a farce”. He was found guilty of
contempt of court, sentenced to six months
in prison and fined 50,000 kwanzas. 1 On 5
July, the Constitutional Court ruled on appeal
that the trial had violated some of his
constitutional rights and ordered his release.
The same words were said in court on 28
March by another young activist, Francisco
Mapanda (also known as Dago Nível
Intelecto). He too was found guilty of
contempt of court and sentenced to eight
months in prison. He was released on 21
November, seven days earlier than
scheduled. 2
Human rights defenders
Human rights defender and former prisoner
of conscience José Marcos Mavungo was
released on 20 May following an appeal
Amnesty International Report 2016/17before the Supreme Tribunal. The Tribunal
found that there was insufficient evidence to
convict him. José Marcos Mavungo had been
sentenced to six years in prison on 14
September 2015 for “rebellion”, a state
security offence. He had been in detention
since 14 March 2015 for involvement in
organizing a peaceful demonstration.
On 12 July, Cabinda Provincial Tribunal
dismissed the charges against human rights
defender and former prisoner of conscience
Arão Bula Tempo. He had been arrested on
14 March 2015 and conditionally released
two months later. He was charged with
“rebellion” and “attempted collaboration with
foreigners to constrain the Angolan state”,
both categorized as state security offences.
The charges were based on allegations that
Arão Bula Tempo had invited foreign
journalists to cover the 14 March protest
being planned by José Marcos Mavungo.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Civil society organizations working on human
rights issues, such as OMUNGA and SOS-
Habitat, faced undue restrictions on
accessing their own funds, including from
international sources. Banks prevented the
organizations from accessing their accounts.
This not only hampered their legitimate work
but also undermined the right of associations
to seek and secure resources, and had a
broader impact on human rights in general.
Despite their complaints to government
institutions in charge of overseeing banking
activities, no response had been received by
the end of the year.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities frequently refused to allow
peaceful demonstrations to take place, even
though they do not require prior authorization
in Angola. When demonstrations did take
place, police often arbitrarily arrested and
detained peaceful protesters.
On 30 July, more than 30 peaceful
activists were arbitrarily arrested and
detained for up to seven hours in the city of
Benguela. They were planning to take part in
a peaceful demonstration organized by the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Benguela Revolutionary Movement to
demand effective measures against inflation.
All were released without charge. A few days
later, four of the activists were rearrested,
again without a warrant. They were released
on bail. They had not been formally charged
by the end of the year, but the Public
Prosecutor told them that they were
suspected of aggravated robbery, drug-
trafficking and violence against MPLA
supporters. 3 No one was held to account for
the arbitrary arrests and detentions. 4
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 18 November, the National Assembly
approved five draft bills (Press Law,
Journalist’s Statute, Radio Broadcasting Law,
Television Law and Social Communications
Regulatory Body Law) that will further restrict
freedom of expression. Opposition parties,
the Union of Angolan Journalists and other
civil society actors criticized the bills for
enabling tighter government control over
television, radio, the press, social media and
the internet.
Among the changes proposed was the
creation of a social communications
regulatory body with wide regulatory and
oversight competences, including
determining whether or not a given
communication meets good journalistic
practices. Such a provision would amount to
prior censorship and would hinder the free
flow of ideas and opinions. The majority of
the regulatory body’s members were to be
nominated by the ruling party and the party
with the most seats in the National Assembly
(MPLA in both cases), raising concerns that
the body would be a political institution that
silences critical voices and dissent.
RIGHT TO HEALTH – YELLOW FEVER
OUTBREAK
An outbreak of yellow fever, first reported in
Luanda in the last quarter of 2015, continued
into the second half of 2016 and included
suspected cases in all of the country’s 18
provinces. Of the 3,625 cases reported in this
period, 357 resulted in death. The outbreak
was made worse by a vaccine shortage at the
67major public hospital in Luanda where cases
were first diagnosed. The UN CESCR
recommended that Angola increase
resources to the health sector, particularly to
improve infrastructure and expand health
care facilities especially in rural areas.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTION
In its 2016 review of Angola, the UN CESCR
expressed concern at the persistence of
forced evictions, including from informal
settlements and during development
projects, without the necessary procedural
guarantees or the provision of alternative
housing or adequate compensation to the
affected individuals and groups.
Communities were resettled in makeshift
homes without adequate access to basic
services such as water, electricity, sanitation,
health care and education.
On 6 August, a military officer shot dead
14-year-old Rufino Antônio, who was
standing in front of his home in an attempt to
prevent its demolition. The military police had
been deployed there that day to deal with a
demonstration against the demolition of
houses in Zango II, Viana Municipality in
Luanda, in the context of a development
project. Those suspected of the killing had
not been brought to justice by the end of the
year.
1. Urgent Action: Angolan activist convicted after unfair trial: Manuel
Chivonde Nito Alves (AFR 12/3464/2016)
2. Urgent Action: Further information: Angolan activist released a week
early: Francisco Mapanda (AFR 12/5205/2016)
3. Urgent Action: Angola: Four youth activists detained without charge
(AFR 12/4631/2016)
4. Amnesty International, OMUNGA and Organização Humanitária
Internacional (OHI) urge Angolan authorities to respect the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly (AFR 12/4590/2016)
ARGENTINA
Argentine Republic
Head of state and government: Mauricio Macri
Women and girls faced obstacles in
accessing legal abortions; the
68
criminalization of sexual and reproductive
rights intensified. Discrimination against
Indigenous Peoples continued.
BACKGROUND
The National Congress passed the Law on
Access to Public Information (Law 27.275).
The National Council of Women presented
the National Action Plan for the Prevention,
Assistance and Eradication of Violence
against Women.
In June and October, mass protests took
place under the slogan “Not One Less” over
pervasive violence against women, femicide
and the lack of public policies to address the
situation.
Argentina was subject to the scrutiny of
the UN Human Rights Committee, the UN
Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW
Committee), and the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In April, a woman from the Tucumán
province was found guilty of “murder” and
sentenced to eight years in prison after
suffering a miscarriage in a hospital,
according to her clinical record. She was
reported to the police by hospital staff for
purportedly inducing an abortion and held in
pre-trial detention for over two years. She was
first charged with undergoing an illegal
abortion and then with aggravated murder for
the premeditated killing of a close relative (a
crime that carries prison sentences of up to
25 years). In August, the UN Human Rights
Committee expressed concern regarding this
case, recommending that the government
consider decriminalizing abortion and calling
for her prompt release. The Committee
further called on Argentina to liberalize its
laws on abortion, to ensure that all women
and girls have access to reproductive health
services, and “that women are not obliged, as
a consequence of legal obstacles, the
exercise of conscientious objection of health
workers or the lack of medical protocols, to
resort to clandestine abortions that put their
lives and health at risk”. The Tucumán
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Supreme Court ultimately ordered the
woman’s release that month but had to issue
a final ruling on the eight-year sentence
imposed on her by the lower court.
In July, a 12-year-old girl from the Wichí
Indigenous community was raped by a group
of non-Indigenous men. The rape resulted in
a pregnancy which she was forced to
continue, despite the fact that her parents
had reported the rape. At 31 weeks, the girl
was allowed to have a caesarean section only
because the pregnancy was unsustainable.
In November, the CEDAW Committee
urged Argentina to ensure that all provinces
approve protocols to facilitate access to legal
abortion; ensure that women have access to
safe legal abortion and post-abortion services
and take definitive steps to prevent “the
blanket use of conscientious objection by
doctors refusing to perform abortions,
considering in particular the situation of early
pregnancies as a result of rape and incest
that may amount to torture”; and “accelerate
the adoption of the draft law for the voluntary
interruption of pregnancy increasing legal
access to abortion”.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Although the Constitution recognizes the
rights of Indigenous Peoples to their ancestral
lands and to participate in the management
of natural resources, the majority of
Indigenous communities remained without
legal acknowledgment of their land rights.
Indigenous Peoples reported over 200
cases of violations of their human rights to
land, participation and consultation, equality
and non-discrimination and access to justice,
among other rights.
2016 marked seven years of impunity in
the case of Javier Chocobar, leader of the
Chuschagasta Indigenous community, who
was killed for peacefully defending his land in
the Northern Province of Tucumán.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, the National Migration Directorate
and the Ministry of Security announced the
establishment of a detention centre for
migrants. This did not comply with the rights
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
to liberty, freedom of movement and the
protection from arbitrary detention.
During the Leaders’ Summit on Refugees
in New York, USA, in September, Argentina
pledged to receive 3,000 Syrian refugees,
prioritizing families with children. At the end
of the year, details of the resettlement
programme remained unspecified.
IMPUNITY
Public trials were held for crimes against
humanity during the military regime between
1976 and 1983. Between 2006 and
December 2016, 173 rulings had been
issued, bringing the total number of those
convicted to 733.
In May, a historic sentence was passed
on the “Plan Cóndor” case, a co-ordinated
intelligence plan launched in the 1970s by
the de facto governing military regimes in
Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay
and Uruguay. Reynaldo Bignone, the last de
facto President of Argentina at the time, was
sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment. A
further 14 military leaders were sentenced to
imprisonment. In August, the sentence on
the “La Perla” historical trial – which
included clandestine centres in Córdoba
Province – was rendered, sentencing 28
perpetrators to life imprisonment. Nine
sentences were passed for between two
and 14 years’ imprisonment and
six acquittals.
By December, the Bicameral Commission
to identify economic and financial interests
that had colluded with the military
dictatorship, created by Law 27.217 in 2015,
had not been established.
The public hearing continued of the cover-
up of the investigation into the 1994 attack
on the Jewish Mutual Association of
Argentina (AMIA) building, in which 85
people were killed. Among those accused
were former President Carlos Menem, a
former judge and other former officials. The
main case relating to the attack had been
stalled since 2006. In August, the AMIA
Prosecutorial Investigation Unit identified
Augusto Daniel Jesús as the final victim who
still had to be identified.
69FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
Reports of unnecessary and excessive use of
force by security forces in the context of
public protests continued.
On 16 January, the social leader Milagro
Sala was arrested and charged for protesting
peacefully in Jujuy in December 2015.
Despite her release being ordered in this
case, further criminal proceedings were then
initiated against her in order to keep her in
detention. In October the UN Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention concluded that her
detention was arbitrary and asked for her
immediate release.
On 17 February, the “Protocol on State
Security Force Conduct during Public
Protests” was published, issued by the
National Ministry of Security, stating that
forces should repress and the justice system
criminally prosecute those exercising their
right to peaceful assembly.
On 31 March, the Buenos Aires Public
Prosecutor’s Office issued judgment FG N
25/2016, which led to serious risks of undue
restriction on the right to peaceful assembly.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The human rights defender Rubén Ortiz was
threatened and intimidated over his support
for the rights of peasant farmer (campesino)
communities in the Province of Misiones. An
investigation process was ongoing at the end
of the year.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The National Committee for the Prevention of
Torture had not been established by the end
of the year, despite government regulation of
the National System for the Prevention of
Torture, comprising legislators, government
authorities and representatives of civil society
organizations. The duties of the Committee
included visits to detention centres,
prevention of prison overpopulation and
regulations on transfers.
70
ARMENIA
Republic of Armenia
Head of state: Serzh Sargsyan
Head of government: Karen Karapetyan (replaced Hovik
Abrahamyan in September)
Police used excessive force to suppress
largely peaceful demonstrations in the
capital, Yerevan, in July. Hundreds of
individuals were arbitrarily arrested. Many
reported being injured, beaten or otherwise
ill-treated during the arrest and while in
detention.
BACKGROUND
The year was marked by economic and
political volatility, and growing security
concerns linked to the outbreak of large-scale
military confrontation in April in Nagorno-
Karabakh, the breakaway region of
Azerbaijan supported by Armenia. On 8
September, Prime Minister Abrahamyan
resigned, citing his government’s failure to
address economic and political challenges.
On 13 September, President Sargsyan
appointed former Yerevan Mayor Karen
Karapetyan as the new Prime Minister.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 17 July a group of armed men stormed a
police compound in the Erebuni district of
Yerevan, killing one police officer, injuring two
and taking several as hostages.
Following the seizure of the compound,
hundreds gathered at the Liberty Square to
show solidarity with the gunmen and join
their calls for the release of the imprisoned
opposition activist Jirair Sefilian – who had
been charged with illegal arms possession –
and to call for the resignation of the
President. A two-week-long standoff with
police sparked widespread anti-government
protests in Yerevan, resulting in several
clashes with the police. The protests took
place daily and dwindled after the hostage-
takers surrendered on 30 July. While police
allowed peaceful gatherings in most
instances, they regularly detained protesters
Amnesty International Report 2016/17and others. On several occasions, protests in
Yerevan were dispersed with excessive force.
On 20 July, clashes ensued after police
refused to allow protesters to pass food to the
armed group inside the compound. Some
protesters started pushing police officers and
throwing stones and water bottles. Police
responded by using stun grenades and tear
gas indiscriminately and injured many
peaceful protesters and bystanders. Police
then started dispersing the rally and arresting
participants. Several eyewitnesses said that
police officers chased and beat fleeing
demonstrators before arresting them;
136 people were reported detained, dozens
injured.
0n 29 July police used excessive force
against peaceful demonstrators in Sari-Tagh,
near the seized compound. The police
warned the crowd to disperse; shortly
afterwards they fired tear gas and threw stun
grenades indiscriminately, wounding dozens
of demonstrators and some journalists. A
group of men armed with wooden batons
then moved into the crowd from behind the
police line and ambushed and beat
demonstrators and journalists. Meanwhile,
the police blocked the street to prevent the
crowd from fleeing and proceeded to arrest
all demonstrators. At least 14 journalists
reported being deliberately targeted by stun
grenades and beaten to prevent them from
live reporting. At least 60 people were
reported injured and hospitalized, including
with severe burns from exploding grenades.
During the following weeks, five police
officers were suspended for using excessive
force; the head of Yerevan police was
dismissed and 13 police officers, including
some of high rank, were formally
reprimanded for “failing to prevent violent
attacks on protesters and journalists”.
Investigations into both incidents were
ongoing at the end of the year.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Following the events of 17 July, police
summoned political activists for questioning.
According to media reports, around 200
individuals, mostly opposition supporters and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
activists, were brought to police stations,
without being formally arrested. Activists
reported that police visited their family
homes, threatened their family members with
arrests and conducted illegal searches.
Activists were questioned and held in police
stations, some for more than 12 hours, and
released without charge. They were not
allowed to notify their families or relatives of
their whereabouts and were denied access to
their lawyers.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment by police and
in detention facilities continued to be widely
reported.
In February, the Nubarashen prison
administration forced imprisoned activist
Vardges Gaspari to undergo a psychiatric
examination after he alleged that the
administration had ordered his cellmates to
beat, threaten and pour cold water on him.
During the July events, a number of
activists reported being denied access to
water, medicine and necessary medical aid
after being detained by the police for
participating in protests; in some cases they
were held for more than 12 hours without
charge. Several individuals reported being
severely beaten or otherwise ill-treated at the
time of arrest and in detention, and
prevented from notifying their relatives and
lawyers of their whereabouts.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In July, the government changed the law on
abortion to ban sex-selective abortion
between the 12th and 22nd weeks of
pregnancy. The new law introduced a
mandatory three-day waiting period and
counselling for women after they had made
the initial appointment for an abortion. Some
women’s groups raised concerns that the
waiting period might be used to discourage
women from having abortions and result in
increased corruption, unsafe abortions and,
consequently, an increase in maternal
mortality. According to reports by the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) sex-
71selective abortions were “prevalent” in
Armenia.
AUSTRALIA
Australia
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by Peter
Cosgrove
Head of government: Malcolm Turnbull
The justice system continued to fail
Indigenous people, particularly children,
with high rates of incarceration, reports of
abuse and deaths in custody. Australia
maintained its hardline policies of confining
people seeking asylum in offshore
processing centres in Papua New Guinea
and Nauru, and turning back those
attempting to reach Australia by boat.
Counter-terror measures violated basic
human rights.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous children were 24 times more
likely to be detained than non-Indigenous
children. Despite the recommendation by the
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child that
the international minimum age of criminal
responsibility should be 12, the age was 10
throughout Australia. Children aged 10 or 11
were detained in every state except
Tasmania. Nearly three quarters of them were
Indigenous children.
Contrary to Article 37(c) of the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 17-
year-olds were tried as, and jailed with, adults
in the state of Queensland. The Queensland
government passed legislation to change this
in November. In December, the Court of
Appeal in Victoria found the detention of
children in an adult prison to be unlawful and
ordered their transfer to a youth justice
facility. Instead, the Victorian government
officially renamed part of the adult prison a
youth facility.
Leaked footage exposed abuse and other
ill-treatment of children in detention in the
Northern Territory. Similar abuses were
reported in Queensland. 1 This led to the
72
announcement of a Royal Commission into
youth detention in the Northern Territory and
an independent review in Queensland.
Indigenous adults were 15 times more
likely to be jailed than non-Indigenous adults.
At least five Indigenous people died in
custody in various states and territories
throughout the year.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In April, the Papua New Guinea Supreme
Court ruled that the detention of around 900
men held in the Australian-run facilities on
Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island was
unlawful and ordered that they be closed
immediately. No timeframe had been made
public for the closure of the centres by either
the Australian or Papua New Guinean
governments by the end of the year (see
Papua New Guinea entry).
As of 30 November, there were 383
people, of whom 44 were children, 49
women and 290 men, in an offshore
processing centre on Nauru, where they
continued to suffer neglect, ill-treatment and
other abuse in a deliberate policy to deter
asylum-seekers from trying to reach Australia
by boat (see Nauru entry). 2
Around 320 people taken to Australia for
medical treatment remained at risk of being
returned to either Nauru or Manus Island.
In November, the Australian government
announced that some of the refugees
detained on Nauru and Papua New Guinea’s
Manus Island, would be resettled in the US.
During the year, at least three boats
carrying asylum-seekers were returned
directly to Sri Lanka. In June a boat was
returned to Viet Nam before the passengers’
claims for asylum had been adequately
assessed. An unspecified number of boats
were turned back to Indonesia.
Australia continued its policy of mandatory
indefinite detention of asylum-seekers. As of
30 November, 1,414 people were held in
onshore detention.
More than a year after Australia
announced it would resettle an additional
12,000 Syrian and Iraqi refugees, nearly
8,400 refugees had arrived by December.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Despite overwhelming support from the
public, there was still no legislation on
marriage equality. Under the current law,
marriage is permissible only between a man
and a woman.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
New counter-terror laws were proposed and
passed. Among those proposed was a
continuing detention order allowing for
detention beyond expiry of sentence.
Legislative changes allowed for children as
young as 14 years old to be put under control
orders, reduced from 16 years. Citizenship
laws with the potential to make people
stateless came into effect.
1. Australia: Reforms to justice system essential to protect the rights of
Indigenous youth (NWS 11/4730/2016)
2. Australia: Appalling abuse, neglect of refugees on Nauru (NWS
11/4586/2016)
AUSTRIA
Republic of Austria
Head of state: Heinz Fischer (until 8 July 2016), then
jointly (ad interim) Doris Bures, Karlheinz Kopf, Norbert
Hofer
Head of government: Christian Kern (replaced Werner
Fayman in May)
The number of asylum claims registered
dropped by half compared to the previous
year. However, in April Parliament gave the
power to the government to rely on an
emergency procedure to curtail the number
of asylum-seekers in the country. A new law
granted far-reaching surveillance and
investigative powers to the intelligence
agency.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January, the government announced a cap
on the number of asylum applications for
2016 at 37,500. Between January and
November, approximately 39,600 people
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
requested asylum in Austria. Almost 32,300
applications were deemed admissible. In the
same period in 2015, approximately 81,000
people had requested asylum.
In April, Parliament passed an amendment
to the Asylum Act granting the government
the power to declare a threat to public order
and security when high numbers of asylum-
seekers were entering the country. This
decree would trigger a fast-track asylum
procedure in which border police would
determine the admissibility of applications for
international protection. Police would also
forcibly return asylum-seekers who had
crossed the border to neighbouring countries
of transit without being required to provide a
reasoned justification. Asylum-seekers would
only be able to appeal from abroad as the
appeals would be non-suspensive. The
implementation of the amendment could
result in the violation of the principle of non-
refoulement and the right to have access to a
fair and efficient asylum procedure. At the
end of the year, the government had not
triggered the procedure.
The amendment also severely limits the
possibilities for refugees and beneficiaries of
subsidiary protection to obtain family
reunification.
While conditions in some reception centres
improved, asylum procedures continued to
be inadequate in identifying and assisting
persons with specific needs, such as victims
of torture, human trafficking, or gender-based
violence. Support services, including health
care for persons in need of special care,
including unaccompanied minors, remained
insufficient.
DISCRIMINATION
In June, the authorities expressed concern
regarding racially motivated attacks on
asylum shelters. In the same month, an
asylum shelter was set alight before its official
opening in the town of Altenfelden. In the first
six months of the year, the Ministry of Interior
reported almost as many criminal offences
against asylum shelters (24) as for the whole
of 2015 (25).
73In June, an intersex person filed a
complaint following the refusal by the civil
registry office in Steyr to register their gender
as neutral (neither male nor female). The
case was pending before the Administrative
Court of Upper Austria at the end of the year.
In August, several authorities, including
the Federal Chancellor, expressed support for
the right of same-sex couples to marry.
However, no legislative amendments were
tabled to this effect.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In July, the Police State Protection Act
entered into force. The new legislation grants
far-reaching surveillance and investigative
powers to the domestic intelligence agency,
the Federal Office for the Protection of the
Constitution and the Fight against Terrorism.
In particular, the Office can collect and store
personal data from a wide variety of sources
and launch investigations without informing
the affected individuals. The lack of judicial
oversight and the discretion with which the
Office can exercise its powers raised
concerns regarding the respect of the rights
to privacy and to an effective remedy, among
others.
AZERBAIJAN
Republic of Azerbaijan
Head of state: Ilham Aliyev
Head of government: Artur Rasizade
Some prisoners of conscience were
released, but at least 14 remained in
prison. Most human rights organizations
forced to suspend their activities in
previous years were unable to resume their
work. Reprisals against independent
journalists and activists persisted.
International human rights monitors were
denied access to Azerbaijan. Torture and
other ill-treatment was widely reported, as
well as arbitrary arrests of government
critics.
74
BACKGROUND
Azerbaijan’s oil-dependent economy was
deeply affected by falling oil prices and the
decline of its currency, the manat, by half of
its value. Food prices rose without an
equivalent rise in wages. From early January,
spontaneous, and in most cases peaceful,
protests against the devaluation of the manat
and consequent price hikes spread across
the country. The protests were clamped down
on by police and security forces. On
18 January, President Aliyev signed a decree
increasing the minimum pension and salaries
of state employees by 10%. The measure
remained insufficient to address the decline
in living standards.
In April, hostilities escalated between
Azerbaijan and the Armenia-backed break-
away Nagorno-Karabakh region. The fighting
lasted four days and resulted in civilian and
military casualties on both sides and small
territorial gains by Azerbaijani forces.
In September, a referendum approved
proposed amendments to the Constitution,
giving further powers to the President. The
amendments extended the presidential term
and granted the President the authority to
declare early Presidential elections and to
dissolve Parliament.
In November, the EU Council approved a
new mandate for the negotiation of a
“comprehensive” agreement with Azerbaijan
to replace the 1996 Partnership and Co-
operation Agreement (PCA) which governed
EU-Azerbaijan bilateral relations. The political
dialogue under the PCA had been halted in
recent years as Azerbaijan’s human rights
record continued to deteriorate.
PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE
Government critics continued to be
incarcerated. In the early part of the year,
several high-profile prisoners convicted
following politically motivated trials were
released, among them at least 12 prisoners
of conscience. None of those released were
cleared of criminal charges. Following its visit
to Azerbaijan in May, the UN Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention noted that “human
Amnesty International Report 2016/17rights defenders, journalists, political and
religious leaders continue to be arbitrarily
detained”.
Some released prisoners of conscience,
including journalist Khadija Ismayilova and
human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev, were
banned from travelling abroad; most were
effectively barred from continuing their work.
The criminal cases opened in 2014 and
2015 against a group of prominent NGOs,
which were used as a pretext to arrest several
prisoners of conscience for tax evasion and
fraud, remained open at the end of the year.
On 10 May, youth activists Giyas Ibrahimov
and Bayram Mammadov were detained on
trumped-up drug-related charges after they
painted political graffiti on a statue of
Azerbaijan’s former President Heydar Aliyev.
They were sentenced to 10 years’
imprisonment on 25 October and 8
December respectively.
On 18 November, the Supreme Court
rejected the appeal by prisoner of conscience
Ilgar Mammadov, upholding his seven-year
prison sentence. The sentence was upheld
despite a European Court of Human Rights
ruling that found Ilgar Mammadov had been
arrested without any evidence, and repeated
calls by the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe for his release.
At the end of the year, at least 14 prisoners
of conscience remained in prison. Local
human rights activists estimated that more
than 100 people remained imprisoned on
politically motivated charges.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
All mainstream media remained under
government control; independent outlets
continued to come under pressure from the
authorities. Independent journalists faced
intimidation, harassment and physical
violence in connection with reporting that
criticized the authorities.
On 20 April, the authorities launched a
criminal investigation into Meydan TV, an
internet-based, independent Azeri-language
media outlet, alleging illegal
entrepreneurship, large-scale tax evasion and
abuse of power. Fifteen Meydan TV
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
journalists, some reporting from abroad, were
also under investigation. Those working in
Azerbaijan received travel restrictions
prohibiting them from leaving the country.
The criminal investigations against them were
ongoing at the end of the year.
In November, Afgan Sadykhov and Teymur
Kerimov, two journalists reporting on social
issues, were detained and charged with
assault after they were attacked by
unidentified persons.
Zamin Gadji, a journalist with the
opposition newspaper Yeni Musavat, was
summoned and threatened by police at Baku
police station on 28 November over a
Facebook post criticizing the government’s
failure to investigate high-profile
murder cases.
On 29 November, Parliament approved
amendments to the Criminal Code
criminalizing online insults against the
honour and dignity of the President. The new
law provided for fines and imprisonment for
up to three years.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Most of the leading Azerbaijani human rights
NGOs were unable to resume their work
following the freezing of their assets and
ongoing harassment of their members,
including criminal prosecution. Several NGO
leaders convicted of trumped-up charges
remained in prison; others were forced into
exile for fear of persecution.
Early in the year, the government unfroze
the bank accounts of eight NGOs involved in
the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI), an international group
promoting open and accountable
management of extractive resources. The
decision came after the EITI downgraded
Azerbaijan’s membership to a Candidate
country in 2015 due to the government
crackdown on civil society.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Police continued to suppress and disperse
peaceful protests using excessive force.
During nationwide demonstrations in
January, in at least two instances police used
75excessive force to disperse a peaceful crowd
and arrested scores of peaceful
demonstrators. Across the country, the
authorities also summoned for questioning
and arrested a number of political activists,
accusing them of organizing the protests.
The Constitutional amendments
introduced following the September
referendum granted the government even
more power to restrict the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly. The amendments limited
property rights and allowed the restriction of
freedom of assembly if it breached “public
morals”.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Armenian Ministry of Defence reported 93
persons killed on its side, including four
civilians. The two parties accused each other
of under-reporting military casualties and
over-reporting civilian casualties. Both sides
reportedly targeted civilian properties,
including schools.
BAHAMAS
Commonwealth of the Bahamas
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by
Marguerite Pindling
Head of government: Perry Gladstone Christie
Law enforcement officials continued to
commit torture and other ill-treatment with
impunity.
Human rights defenders reported torture
and other ill-treatment of members of the
Muslim Unity movement who had been
arrested during clashes with government
security forces in the village of Nardaran in
2015. Muslim Unity activists were accused of
trying to forcibly change the constitutional
system and to create an organized
armed group.
The youth activists Bayram Mammadov
and Giyas Ibrahimov reported that they were
tortured and otherwise ill-treated in detention.
Injuries consistent with their allegations were
confirmed by the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention after visiting the activists
in detention. Their findings were ignored by
judges during remand and case hearings.
Another youth activist, Elgiz Gahraman, told
his lawyer he had been subject to torture
following his arrest on 12 August. He was
held incommunicado for 48 hours and forced
to “confess” to charges of drug possession.
At the end of the year he remained in
detention with his trial pending. Widespread ill-treatment and other abuses
against irregular migrants from countries
including Haiti and Cuba continued.
Bahamians voted “no” in a constitutional
referendum on gender equality in
citizenship matters in June. Discrimination
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex people continued.
ARMED CONFLICT Stigma and discrimination against lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people continued.
In April, activists founded the group
Bahamas Transgender Intersex United. After
its first press conference, members of the
Four days of armed clashes between
government forces and the forces of the self-
declared Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh took
place in April. Azerbaijan reported the deaths
of six civilians and 31 military personnel; the
76
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
On 7 June, Bahamians voted “no” in a
referendum on gender equality in citizenship
matters under Bahamian law. The proposed
amendments – backed by the government –
would have strengthened anti-discrimination
protections based on sex.
The result maintained inequality in
Bahamian laws so that women and men pass
on citizenship to their children and spouses
in different ways. The result put at risk the
citizenship rights of families, in particular the
risk of separation of families with diverse
nationalities or children born outside of the
Bahamas to Bahamian parents.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Amnesty International Report 2016/17group reported receiving threats from
members of the public. In May, an MP
suggested that transgender people be exiled
to another island.
RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Local human rights groups expressed fear
regarding government surveillance online. In
August, the Supreme Court ruled that the
Minister of Education had breached the
constitutional rights to privacy and to freedom
of expression of members of an
environmental group when he obtained and
read their private email correspondence in
Parliament. Ministers had alleged that the
group was seeking to destabilize the
government, and argued that parliamentary
privilege allowed them to read out the
confidential emails. The Court held that
parliamentary privilege was subject to the
supremacy of the Constitution, and ordered
the destruction of the correspondence. At the
end of the year, it remained unclear how the
government had obtained the emails.
In November, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights granted
precautionary measures to members of the
environmental group who allegedly received
threats against their lives and personal
integrity because of their work as human
rights defenders. The government, in
response, said the allegations were
misrepresented.
BAHRAIN
Kingdom of Bahrain
Head of state: King Hamad bin Issa al-Khalifa
Head of government: Shaikh Khalifa bin Salman al-
Khalifa
The authorities tightened restrictions on the
rights to freedom of expression and
association and continued to curtail the
right to peaceful assembly. They detained
and charged several human rights defenders
and banned others from travelling abroad,
dissolved the main opposition group and
stripped more than 80 people of their
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Bahraini citizenship, forcibly expelling four.
Opposition leaders continued to be
imprisoned as prisoners of conscience.
There were new reports of torture and other
ill-treatment and unfair trials. Women
continued to be discriminated against in
law and practice. Migrant workers and
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex people faced discrimination. There
were no new death sentences or executions.
BACKGROUND
In March, Bahrain became a state party to
the UN Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons.
In May, Bahrain’s National Institution for
Human Rights (NIHR) received a “B” status
from the International Coordinating
Committee of National Institutions as it was
not fully compliant with the Paris Principles.
One of the reasons given by the Committee
was that the NIHR decision-making board
included government representatives,
undermining its independence.
Also in May, the government signed a
trade and economic agreement with
Switzerland containing two non-legally
binding memorandums on the treatment of
prisoners and on women’s rights in Bahrain.
In September the government of the USA
blocked sales of fighter jets and related
equipment to Bahrain pending human
rights improvements.
Bahrain remained part of the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition engaged in armed
conflict in Yemen (see Yemen entry).
The government did not allow access to
representatives from international human
rights organizations, including Amnesty
International, throughout the year.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to severely restrict
freedom of expression, arresting and
prosecuting human rights defenders and
religious activists for using public gatherings
or social media to criticize the government,
the Saudi Arabian authorities and air strikes
by the Saudi Arabian-led coalition in Yemen.
Opposition leaders sentenced in previous
77years for their peaceful opposition remained
held as prisoners of conscience.
In February a court sentenced Ebrahim
Sharif, former Secretary General of the
National Democratic Action Society (Waad),
to a one-year prison term after convicting him
of “incitement to hatred and contempt of the
regime”. He was released in July after
completing his sentence; his one-year prison
term was upheld in November. Also in
November the authorities charged him with
“inciting hatred against the regime” for
comments he made in a media interview
about the visit to Bahrain of Prince Charles
from the UK. The charges were dropped the
same month.
In March, the authorities detained activist
Zainab al-Khawaja to serve sentences
totalling 37 months following her conviction
on various charges, including tearing pictures
of the King. Her imprisonment was widely
condemned. The authorities released her in
May on “humanitarian grounds”; she
subsequently left Bahrain.
In April a criminal court imposed a one-
year prison term on activist Dr Sa’eed
Mothaher Habib al-Samahiji for criticizing the
Saudi Arabian authorities on Twitter.
In May an appeals court increased the
2015 prison sentence of Sheikh Ali Salman,
leader of the main opposition group al-Wefaq
National Islamic Society, from four to nine
years. The court had overturned his acquittal
of the charge of inciting change of the
political system “by force, threats and other
illegal means”. In October the Court of
Cassation rejected this decision and returned
the case to the appeals court, which upheld
its initial nine-year prison sentence
in December.
In June, human rights defender Nabeel
Rajab was arrested and charged with
“spreading false information and rumours
with the aim of discrediting the state” during
televised interviews. In July, his trial opened
in relation to his Twitter posts in 2015 alleging
torture in Jaw Prison and criticizing Saudi-led
aerial bombing in Yemen. In December, the
court ordered his release on bail while his
trial was ongoing but he was immediately re-
78
arrested for investigation into the initial
charge for which he had been arrested in
June. He also faced separate prosecutions
for comments he made in a New York Times
article entitled “Letter from a Bahraini Jail”
and in a letter published in Le Monde
newspaper.
The authorities continued to restrict the
media. In February the Minister of
Information prohibited media outlets from
employing journalists deemed to “insult”
Bahrain or other Gulf or Arab states.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The authorities tightened restrictions on
freedom of association, continuing to
imprison some leaders of al-Wefaq and
other opposition parties and harassing others
by summoning them several times for
interrogation.
The authorities suspended al-Wefaq,
seized its assets in June and obtained a court
order for its dissolution in July for alleged
breaches of the Law on Political Associations.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities maintained their ban on all
public gatherings in the capital, Manama.
Frequent protests, including some which
turned violent, continued in Shi’a villages,
particularly following the enforced dissolution
of al-Wefaq. The security forces used
excessive force to disperse some protests,
firing shotgun pellets and tear gas, and
arresting scores of religious activists and
other protesters, including children. At least
one police officer and one member of the
public died in protest-related violence.
In January, the security forces forcibly
dispersed people protesting against the
execution of Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr in Saudi
Arabia. Police used tear gas and shotgun
pellets and arrested protesters.
In June, security forces blocked access
into Duraz village for all but village residents
after protesters gathered and began a sit-in
protest outside the home of Shi’a Sheikh Issa
Qassem after the authorities revoked his
Bahraini citizenship. As the sit-in continued,
the authorities arrested or summoned scores
Amnesty International Report 2016/17of protesters for questioning, including at
least 70 Shi’a clerics and several human
rights defenders, charging some with “illegal
gathering”. Courts sentenced 11 Shi’a clerics
to one- or two-year prison terms on the
same charge.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
The authorities imposed administrative bans
that prevented at least 30 human rights
defenders and other critics from travelling
abroad, including to attend meetings of the
UN Human Rights Council in Geneva,
Switzerland. At least 12 of them were later
charged, including with “illegal gathering”.
Deprivation of nationality and forced expulsions
The authorities obtained court orders that
stripped at least 80 people convicted of
terrorism-related offences of their Bahraini
nationality, rendering many of them stateless.
In June the Ministry of the Interior also
revoked the nationality of Sheikh Issa
Qassem, al-Wefaq’s spiritual leader; he had
not been convicted of any offence. The
authorities forcibly expelled four of those
whose citizenship they had withdrawn,
including human rights lawyer Taimoor
Karimi. An appeal court ruled in March that
prisoner of conscience Ibrahim Karimi should
be forcibly expelled from Bahrain when he
completes his 25-month prison sentence in
2018.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued to
be reported, particularly of people suspected
of terrorism and other offences under
interrogation by the police Criminal
Investigations Directorate. Unfair trials
continued; courts continued to rely on
allegedly coerced “confessions” to convict
defendants on terrorism-related charges.
Prisoners held at Dry Dock Prison and Jaw
Prison complained of ill-treatment, including
solitary confinement and inadequate
medical care.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
IMPUNITY
Impunity continued largely to prevail although
the Ombudsman of the Ministry of the
Interior and Special Investigations Unit (SIU)
within the Public Prosecution Office
continued to investigate alleged human rights
violations by the security forces. Several low-
ranking members of the security forces were
prosecuted, but no senior officers.
The SIU said it received at least 225
complaints and referred 11 members of the
security forces for trial on assault charges
during the year. At least four members of the
security forces were convicted and at least 12
acquitted during the year. In January the
Court of Appeal increased from two to seven
years the prison sentences imposed on two
police officers for causing the death in
custody of Ali Issa Ibrahim al-Saqer in 2011.
In March the Court sentenced a police officer
to three years’ imprisonment for the unlawful
killing of Fadhel Abbas Muslim Marhoon in
2014, overturning his earlier acquittal.
In February the Court of Appeal confirmed
the acquittal of a police officer whose
shooting of a peaceful protester at close
range in January 2015 was captured on film,
ruling that there was no evidence confirming
the victim’s presence or any injuries found,
despite the video footage. In March the Court
overturned the convictions of three police
officers sentenced in 2015 for causing the
death in custody of Hassan Majeed al-Shaikh
in November 2014, and reduced the
sentences of three other officers from five to
two years.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
The authorities continued to prosecute and
imprison people for same-sex sexual conduct
under “debauchery” and “obscenity”
provisions of the Penal Code.
In January and February, the courts
rejected applications by three Bahrainis who
had undergone sex-change operations
abroad to change their gender in official
documents.
79In September a court sentenced 28 men
to prison terms of between six months and
two years after convicting them on
“debauchery” and “obscenity” charges for
attending a private party at which some wore
female clothes. In November, an appeal court
reduced their sentences to between one and
three months.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women faced discrimination in law and
practice. In May, Parliament agreed to
abolish Article 353 of the Penal Code, which
had allowed rapists to avoid a prison
sentence if their victim consented to
marry them.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers continued to face
exploitation and abuse by employers. In July,
more than 2,000 migrant workers
participated in a peaceful march to protest
against non-payment of their salaries
by employers.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force. The
courts did not hand down new death
sentences but the Court of Cassation
confirmed two and overturned four death
sentences passed in previous years, three of
which were later re-imposed by the court of
appeal. There were no executions.
BANGLADESH
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Head of state: Abdul Hamid
Head of government: Sheikh Hasina
Armed groups claiming to act in the name
of Islam killed dozens of people in targeted
attacks, including foreign nationals, secular
activists and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people.
The government’s response was marked by
human rights violations, including arbitrary
arrests, enforced disappearances, unlawful
killings, torture and other ill-treatment. The
80
right to freedom of expression was further
restricted as the government applied
repressive laws and pressed criminal
charges against critics.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Independent media outlets and journalists
came under severe pressure by the
government. Several journalists faced
arbitrary criminal charges, often for
publishing criticism of Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina, her family or the Awami League
Government. Journalists reported increased
threats from government officials or security
agencies.
In February, more than 80 sedition and
defamation cases were brought against
Mahfuz Anam, editor of the newspaper Daily
Star. The charges related to his admission
that he had, under pressure from military
intelligence, published unsubstantiated
corruption allegations against Sheikh Hasina
when she was out of government during the
military rule of the 1990s. All charges were
stayed by the High Court but the prosecution
could reactivate them in the future. In April,
82-year-old journalist and opposition
supporter Shafik Rehman was arrested on
suspicion of involvement in an alleged plot to
“kill and kidnap” the Prime Minister’s son,
Joy Wazed. After being held for more than
four months without charge, including several
weeks in solitary confinement, he was
released on bail in August.
The government continued to use a range
of repressive laws to restrict the right to
freedom of expression extensively. It
increasingly used the Information and
Communications Technology Act which
arbitrarily restricted online expression. The
human rights organization Odhikar reported
at least 35 arrests under the Act, compared
to 33 in 2015 and 14 in 2014. Journalists,
activists and others were targeted. Dilip Roy,
a student activist, was one of those arrested,
in September, for criticizing the Prime
Minister on Facebook. He was released on
bail on 17 November.
In October, parliament adopted the
Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Regulation Act which significantly increased
government control over the work of NGOs
and threatened them with deregistration for
making “inimical” or “derogatory” remarks
against the Constitution or constitutional
bodies. Several other bills that threatened
freedom of expression were proposed in
parliament, including the Digital Security Act
and the Liberation War Denial Crimes Act.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Enforced disappearances continued at an
alarming rate, often of supporters of
opposition parties Bangladesh National Party
and Jamaat-e-Islami. Odhikar reported at
least 90 people arrested by security forces
and not heard from again. In August, three
sons of prominent opposition politicians –
Abdullahil Amaan Azmi, Mir Ahmed Bin
Quasem and Hummam Qader Chowdhury –
were arrested by men in plain clothes, some
of whom identified themselves as police
officers. The authorities continued to deny
responsibility and the victims’ families were
not informed of their whereabouts.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups killed at least 32 people in
targeted attacks in 2016, including secular
activists, LGBTI people and religious
minorities. Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen
Bangladesh (JMB) and Ansar al-Islam, which
respectively claimed allegiance to the armed
groups Islamic State (IS) and al-Qa’ida,
claimed the attacks. In April, Nazimuddin
Samad became the sixth secular activist to
be hacked to death in a targeted killing in
less than two years. The editor of Roopbaan,
Bangladesh’s only LGBTI magazine, and
prominent LGBTI rights activist Xulhaz
Mannan and his friend Tanay Mojumdar,
were also killed by unidentified men. A range
of human rights activists received threats
from similar groups and said that the police
did not offer enough protection, while others
were reluctant to approach the police fearing
they would be charged or harassed.
In July, JMB gunmen stormed a restaurant
in the capital, Dhaka, and killed at least 22
people, including 18 foreign nationals. Police
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
responded with a heavy-handed “anti-terror”
crackdown. At least 15,000 people were
arrested, and human rights groups raised
concerns that several thousand were
politically motivated arrests of opposition
supporters. Police said at least 45 suspected
“terrorists” were killed in shoot-outs in the
months following the July attack. Two of the
surviving hostages from the attack were
detained by police and held incommunicado
for several weeks before being presented to
court on 4 August. One of them, Hasnat
Karim, was still held without charge at the
end of the year.
DEATH PENALTY
Scores of people were sentenced to death
and several were executed.
In October, one alleged militant convicted
of killing a judge in 2005 was executed. The
government afterwards said that it would fast
track the trials of people accused of crimes
under the Anti-Terrorism Act which could
lead to the death penalty, and that at least 64
people convicted under this Act since 1992
were on death row.
The International Crimes Tribunal (ICT), a
Bangladeshi court established to investigate
the events of the 1971 independence war,
sentenced at least six people to death. The
proceedings were marked by severe
irregularities and violations of fair trial rights,
such as the arbitrary restriction of the
number of defence witnesses allowed. Two
people convicted of war crimes and crimes
against humanity by the ICT were executed,
both senior members of Jamaat-e-Islami −
Motiur Rahman Nizami in May and Mir
Quasem Ali in September. On 23 August a
group of UN human rights experts expressed
concern about the fairness of ICT trials, and
urged the government to annul Mir Quasem
Ali’s death sentence and grant him a retrial,
stating that proceedings were “marred” by
“irregularities”.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment in custody was
widespread; however, complaints were rarely
investigated. The 2013 Torture and Custodial
81Death (Prevention) Act was poorly enforced
due to a lack of political will and awareness
among law enforcement agencies. Human
rights groups accused several security force
branches – including police and the Rapid
Action Battalion – of torture and other ill-
treatment. Torture was carried out to extract
“confessions”, for extortion or to punish
political opponents of the government.
CHITTAGONG HILL TRACTS
Police in September asked a court to close
the investigation into the disappearance of
Kalpana Chakma, an Indigenous Peoples’
rights campaigner, from the Chittagong Hill
Tracts − an area in southeastern Bangladesh
− citing a lack of evidence. She was
abducted in 1996. Government restrictions
on access to the Chittagong Hill Tracts and
on communication with “tribal” people there
remained in place, arbitrarily restricting the
right to freedom of expression of journalists
and human rights organizations. Women and
girls in the region faced multiple forms of
discrimination and violence including rape
and murder due to their gender, Indigenous
identity and socio-economic status. Victims of
gender-based violence continued to be
denied justice because of pressure to settle
out of court, non-availability of judges or
other bureaucratic delays.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Human rights groups said that rape
conviction rates continued to be extremely
low, mainly because investigations were not
timely or effective. Many women and girls
were reluctant to report rape to the
authorities, for fear of being stigmatized and
subjected to police harassment. Human
rights organization Ain o Salish Kendra
confirmed that at least 671 rape cases were
reported by media, with the actual number of
cases likely to be much higher. The rape and
murder of 19-year-old Tonu in March sparked
outrage and large-scale street protests.
Activists claimed the police deliberately
delayed the investigation and pressured the
survivor’s family into making false statements.
82
BELARUS
Republic of Belarus
Head of state: Alyaksandr Lukashenka
Head of government: Andrey Kabyakou
Severe restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression, of association and of
peaceful assembly remained in place. The
government continued to refuse co-
operation with the UN Special Rapporteur
on human rights in Belarus. At least four
people were executed and four people
were sentenced to death.
BACKGROUND
On 28 February, the EU lifted all its sanctions
against persons and entities in Belarus
except those against four former officials
suspected of involvement in enforced
disappearances committed in 1999-2000.
On 1 July, the government redenominated
the value of the Belarusian ruble slashing
four zeros, among other measures. This was
a response to the continuing economic
downfall partially prompted by the downturn
in Russia, its principal trading partner.
Also in July, the mandate of the UN
Special Rapporteur on human rights in
Belarus – established by the UN Human
Rights Council in 2012 – was extended for a
further year.
In September, the new Parliament was
elected against the backdrop of severe
restrictions on independent media and the
political opposition. Only two
parliamentarians regarded as representing
political opposition were elected.
On 24 October, the first national Human
Rights Strategy was adopted. It outlined
legislative reforms, none of which addressed
the death penalty, but promised “to consider”
Belarus’ interest in joining the European
Convention on Human Rights and the
creation of a national human rights
institution.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17DEATH PENALTY
On 18 April, Siarhei Ivanou was executed
despite the pending review of his case at the
UN Human Rights Committee. This was the
first execution since November 2014. 1
Around 5 November, Siarhei Khmialeuski,
Ivan Kulesh and Hyanadz Yakavitski were
executed. Death sentences in Belarus are
typically carried out in secrecy and without
notifying the family. The Supreme Court
rejected the appeal of Siarhei Vostrykau on 4
October. 2 Siarhei Vostrykau was awaiting the
outcome of his plea for clemency from the
President at the end the year; clemency had
been granted only once in over 400 pleas
since 1994.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Law on Mass Media continued to
severely restrict the right to freedom of
expression and effectively subjected all
media companies to government control.
Local journalists working for foreign media
were still required to obtain official
accreditation, which was routinely delayed or
refused arbitrarily.
In January, political blogger Eduard
Palchys, known for his critical posts of the
Belarusian and Russian authorities and who
was residing in Ukraine, was arrested during
a visit to Bryansk, Russia. He was remanded
in custody by the Russian authorities until his
extradition to Belarus on 7 June where he
was placed in detention. On 28 October, he
was found guilty of “inciting racial, national or
religious hatred” and of the “distribution of
pornography”. He was given a non-custodial
sentence on account of having been on
remand since January, and was released in
court. The hearings of his case were closed,
but the courtroom was opened to the public
when the sentence was announced.
SURVEILLANCE
The legal framework governing secret
surveillance allowed the authorities to
undertake wide-ranging surveillance with little
or no justification. The System of Operative-
Investigative Measures (SORM), a system of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
lawful interception of all electronic
communications, allowed the authorities
direct access to telephone and internet
communications and associated data. The
possible surveillance restricted human rights
defenders, other civil society and political
activists as well as journalists in exercising
their human rights, including the rights to
freedom of association, of peaceful assembly
and of expression. 3
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
NGOs and political parties continued to face
undue restrictions, including compulsory
registration. Registration applications were
frequently arbitrarily rejected for minute
infractions or on other unexplained grounds.
Under Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code, the
founding of, or participation in the activities
of, an unregistered organization remained a
crime punishable by up to two years’
imprisonment.
The restrictions imposed on former
prisoners of conscience Mikalai Statkevich,
Yury Rubtsou and four other activists, as a
condition for their early release in 2015,
remained in place.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The Law on Mass Events, which prohibits any
assembly or public protest unless authorized
by the authorities, remained in place.
Civil society activist Pavel Vinahradau was
placed under “preventive supervision” from 7
June to 13 September after he participated in
four “unauthorized" peaceful street protests. 4
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In October, the tax authorities reported that
they had sent notices to over 72,900
individuals who, under the 2015 presidential
decree “On preventing social dependency”,
were required to pay a special tax for being
out of work for over 183 days in a given tax
year. Failure to comply incurred fines or
“administrative arrest” and compulsory
community service which could amount to a
form of forced labour.
831. Belarus: Amnesty International deplores the execution of Siarhei
Ivanou (EUR 49/4014/2016)
2. Further information: Belarus’ last prisoner on death row at risk:
Siarhei Vostrykau (EUR 49/5274/2016) Belarus: Further information:
Gennadii Yakovitskii’s death sentence upheld (EUR 49/3890/2016)
3. It’s enough for people to feel it exists: Civil society, secrecy and
surveillance in Belarus (EUR 49/4306/2016)
4. Belarus: Activist arbitrarily convicted for peaceful protest (EUR
49/4317/2016)
BELGIUM
Kingdom of Belgium
Head of state: King Philippe
Head of government: Charles Michel
The authorities adopted a wide range of new
laws and policies in the aftermath of the
attacks in the capital, Brussels, in March.
Civil society organizations continued to
receive reports of ethnic profiling by police.
Prison conditions remained poor; the
European Court of Human Rights criticized
Belgium for its treatment of mentally ill
offenders.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
On 22 March, three suicide bombers killed
32 people and injured hundreds in two co-
ordinated attacks in Brussels. In the
aftermath of the attacks, the authorities
intensified the implementation of the wide
range of security measures announced after
the attacks in Paris, France, in 2015.
The authorities further broadened the
scope of the provisions on terrorism-related
offences, loosened procedural safeguards
and adopted new policies to address
“radicalization”. Some measures caused
concern regarding the principle of legality,
including legal clarity, and the respect of the
freedoms of association and expression.
In February, the federal government
announced the new policy framework “Plan
Canal” to address radicalization in several
municipalities in the Brussels area. It
included the deployment of increased
police and tighter administrative controls
on associations.
84
In April, the federal government agreed to
establish a database to facilitate the sharing
of information between government agencies
concerning individuals suspected of having
travelled abroad to commit terrorism-related
offences. In July, the government announced
a similar database for “hate preachers”. In
December, Parliament adopted a bill aimed
at broadening police surveillance powers.
Also in July, the federal Parliament
extended the provision on incitement to
commit a terrorism-related offence and eased
restrictions on the use of pre-trial detention
for those suspected of terrorism-related
offences. In December, Parliament passed
legislation criminalizing preparatory acts to
commit a terrorism-related offence and
legislation on retention of Passenger
Name Records.
Despite the government’s commitment at
the UPR in May to ensure that measures to
counter terrorism respect human rights, little
effort was made to assess the human rights
impact of new measures.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Conditions of detention remained poor due to
overcrowding, dilapidated facilities and
insufficient access to basic services,
including to health care. In April, a three-
month strike by prison staff further worsened
prison conditions and access to health care
for prisoners.
Despite the entry into force of positive
legislative amendments in October, many
mentally ill offenders remained detained in
regular prisons with insufficient care and
treatment. In September the European Court
of Human Rights found in W.D. v Belgium
that the detention of mentally ill offenders
without access to adequate care remained a
structural problem. The Court ordered the
government to adopt structural reforms within
two years.
DISCRIMINATION
In April, Belgium’s equality body Unia
reported a rise in discrimination against
persons of Muslim faith in the aftermath of
the Brussels attacks, especially in the area of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17employment. Several individuals and civil
society organizations reported ethnic profiling
by police against ethnic and religious
minorities.
On 9 December, the government agreed
on a draft bill amending the law on legal
gender recognition. If passed, the draft law
would allow transgender people to obtain
legal recognition of their gender on the basis
of their informed consent and without
fulfilling any medical requirements. demonstrators, causing at least one death.
Prisons remained overcrowded.
ARMS TRADE The authorities continued to arbitrarily restrict
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly,
including by banning several opposition
group demonstrations, taking retaliatory
measures against organizers of peaceful
demonstrations, and using excessive and
arbitrary force against protesters.
In the context of the presidential elections,
in January and February the authorities
banned at least three peaceful
demonstrations by opposition groups.
Supporters of the ruling party were able to
hold demonstrations.
In February, the authorities banned a
demonstration by human rights groups to
protest against the unlawful killing of a
member of the military.
In March, security forces shot and killed
one man and injured nine other people,
including two children, at a demonstration in
Bantè (Collines department). According to
eyewitnesses, the demonstration was largely
peaceful until the security forces started firing
at the crowd with tear gas and live
ammunition.
In July, the security forces used tear gas
and batons to disperse a peaceful
demonstration by students in Cotonou,
injuring at least 20 people. At least nine
students were arrested following the
demonstrations and detained for several
weeks before being released. Twenty-one
students presumed to have participated were
banned from registering at the university for
five years. In August, the university decided
to invalidate the academic year for all the
students in the faculty where most
demonstrators were studying. In October, the
Regional governments continued to grant
licences to sell arms to parties involved in the
conflict in Yemen, in particular to Saudi
Arabia. In 2014 and 2015, Saudi Arabia
reportedly accounted for by far the highest
value of arms export licences from the
Wallonia region.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In March, Belgium ratified the Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention). In
June, the authorities adopted a new binding
policy framework which identified tackling
gender-based and domestic violence as a
priority for police and prosecutorial
authorities.
In May, the National Institute of
Criminalistics and Criminology said that 70%
of reported domestic violence incidents did
not lead to a prosecution and that the current
prosecution policy has not been effective in
reducing the numbers of recidivists of
domestic violence.
BENIN
Republic of Benin
Head of state and government: Patrice Athanase
Guillaume Talon (replaced Thomas Boni Yayi in March)
The authorities continued to restrict the
rights to peaceful assembly and expression.
Excessive force was used against peaceful
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
BACKGROUND
Patrice Talon was elected President in March.
Benin became the eighth AU member state
to allow NGOs and individuals direct access
to the African Court on Human and Peoples’
Rights.
FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY
AND EXPRESSION
85Council of Ministers banned all activities by
student associations on campuses.
In November, the High Authority of
Audiovisual Communication made the
arbitrary decision to close seven private
media outlets.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In January, Corporal Mohamed Dangou was
shot dead by a member of the security
services in a military camp in Cotonou.
According to an eyewitness he was unarmed.
Mohamed Dangou was due to be arrested as
part of an investigation into a protest held
with other military personnel serving in Côte
d’Ivoire calling for the payment of allowances.
In July, the Constitutional Court ruled that the
armed forces had violated Mohamed
Dangou’s right to life.
PRISON CONDITIONS
The UN Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture made an unannounced visit to Benin
in January. It concluded that detention
centres were “overcrowded and lacked
adequate staffing and other resources”. As of
September, Cotonou prison held 1,137
detainees, despite a maximum capacity
of 500.
In June, the National Assembly adopted a
law on community service which could be
used to reduce prison overcrowding by
replacing detention with non-custodial
sentences.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In February, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child issued its concluding
observations on Benin, expressing concerns
about the infanticide of children born with
disabilities and the persistence of harmful
practices, including the rise of female genital
mutilation and early and forced marriage.
The Committee highlighted the high rates of
girls dying from illegal abortion and urged
that girls’ rights to education, information
and access to quality contraceptive products
be guaranteed.
DEATH PENALTY
In January, the Constitutional Court abolished
the death penalty in a ruling stating that “no
one can now be sentenced to capital
punishment”. The government had yet to
adopt laws removing the death penalty from
national legislation.
BOLIVIA
Plurinational State of Bolivia
Head of state and government: Evo Morales Ayma
The creation of a truth, justice and
reconciliation commission for human rights
violations and crimes under international
law committed during the military regimes
(1964-1982) remained pending. There
were allegations of a failure to seek the
free, prior and informed consent of
Indigenous Peoples on oil exploration
projects in the Amazon. There was some
progress in protecting the rights of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people and sexual and reproductive
rights. Concerns remained about conditions
in the penitentiary system.
BACKGROUND
In August, Deputy Minister of the Interior
Rodolfo Illanes was killed during miners’
protests. Protesters were opposing the
enactment of an amendment to the
Cooperatives Act, which grants the right
to unionization.
IMPUNITY
Bolivia still had not created the truth, justice
and reconciliation commission on crimes
committed during the military governments
promised at a March 2015 public hearing
before the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights.
RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
In September, the UN Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities released its
86
Amnesty International Report 2016/17report on Bolivia. Among its
recommendations, the Committee urged
Bolivia to improve and adapt mechanisms
and proceedings to ensure access to justice
for people with disabilities and to abolish
the practice of sterilizing people with
disabilities without their free, prior and
informed consent.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In June, peaceful protests by people with
disabilities demanding a monthly disability
allowance were suppressed by police using
tear gas. In August, allegations of excessive
use of force to repress the protests were
reported to the UN Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, which urged the
Bolivian authorities to carry out a thorough
and impartial investigation into the incident.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In March, leaders of Amazonian Indigenous
Peoples and the Centre for Documentation
and Information of Bolivia (CEDIB)
denounced the failure to ensure prior, free
and informed consent for oil exploration
projects taking place on Indigenous
territories.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In May, the lower house of the Congress
passed the Gender Identity Law, which
established administrative procedures for
transgender people over 18 to legally change
their name, sex and image data on official
documents.
In September, the Ombudsman endorsed
a bill that would allow same-sex civil marriage
and enable LGBTI people to enjoy the same
health care and social security rights and
guarantees as other couples. The bill was
due to be submitted to the Plurinational
Legislative Assembly later in the year.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In August, the Ministry of Health and the
University of San Andrés launched the first
Observatory of Maternal and Neonatal
Mortality to monitor and reduce the high
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
rates of maternal and infant mortality in the
country. The Ministry of Health also
announced the development of a bill to
guarantee timely access to family planning.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In July, a petition that two articles of the Law
Granting Legal Personality and its regulations
were unconstitutional was rejected by the
Constitutional Court. The petition had been
presented by the Ombudsman on the
grounds that the law could violate the right to
freedom of association to establish NGOs or
foundations. In October, four NGOs filed a
petition with the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights regarding the law.
PRISON CONDITIONS
In June, the Ombudsman published a report
highlighting the serious problem of
overcrowding and corruption in the
penitentiary system and persistent human
rights violations against those deprived of
their liberty.
BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Head of state: Rotating presidency – Bakir Izetbegović,
Dragan Čović, Mladen Ivanić
Head of government: Denis Zvizdić
Despite the adoption of progressive new
anti-discrimination legislation, vulnerable
minorities faced widespread discrimination.
Threats and attacks against journalists and
media freedom continued. The International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) issued verdicts in relation to crimes
committed during the 1992-1995 conflict;
at the domestic level, access to justice and
reparations for civilian victims of war
remained limited.
87BACKGROUND
In February, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)
submitted an application for membership
to the EU, which was accepted by the EU
in September.
The authorities of Republika Srpska (RS) –
one of the two entities of BiH – refused to
implement a decision of the BiH
Constitutional Court, which had found the RS
Law on Holidays (making 9 January the Day
of Republika Srpska) unconstitutional and
discriminatory against non-Serbs living in
the entity.
Nationwide municipal elections held in
October were marked by growing nationalist
rhetoric. The results of the first post-war
census conducted in 2013 were released in
June, although RS challenged the collection
methodology and the census results.
DISCRIMINATION
The Council of Ministers adopted its first
Action Plan on Prevention of Discrimination
in April and, in June, the Parliamentary
Assembly of BiH adopted amendments to the
Law on Prevention of Discrimination. Widely
welcomed by civil society, the amended law
listed specific grounds for discrimination,
including sexual orientation, and significantly
broadened the prohibited grounds of inciting
discrimination beyond the original racial,
religious and nationality grounds.
The Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina – the other entity of BiH –
adopted amendments to the entity criminal
code to include hate crimes as a criminal
offence. The definition of hate crime included
a wide array of prohibited grounds, although
the penalties prescribed for the offence of
incitement to hatred, hate speech and
violence remained limited to national, ethnic
and religious grounds and excluded hate
speech directed against other marginalized
groups.
Social exclusion and discrimination, in
particular of Roma and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people,
remained widespread. Although the number
of Roma without identity documents reduced
88
and their access to housing slightly improved,
Roma continued to face systemic barriers to
education, health services and employment.
The National Strategy on Roma Integration
and the accompanying Action Plan ended in
2016, without meeting many of its targets.
The Council of Ministers re-purposed a
portion of the funds originally designated to
support the Plan’s implementation.
LGBTI people faced ongoing
discrimination and intimidation. Civil society
groups documented cases of verbal and
physical attacks and discrimination, the
majority of which were not thoroughly
investigated. In March, a group of young men
entered a café and cinema popular with the
LGBTI community in the capital, Sarajevo,
and attacked and threatened the customers.
Several people suffered physical injuries, but
the police classified the incident as a minor
offence. Similarly, the perpetrators of the
2014 attack against the organizers of the
Merlinka Queer Film Festival were never
criminally charged. The 2016 festival took
place under heavy police protection.
The 2009 judgment of the European Court
of Human Rights in Sejdić-Finci v BiH, which
found the power-sharing arrangements set
out in the Constitution to be discriminatory,
remained unimplemented. Under the
arrangements, citizens who would not
declare themselves as belonging to one
of the three constituent peoples of the
country (Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs) were
excluded from running for legislative and
executive office.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
A pattern of threats, political pressure and
attacks against journalists continued in 2016.
The Association of Journalists documented
repeated attacks against journalists, attacks
on freedom of expression and on the integrity
of media outlets.
CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
The ICTY issued first-instance verdicts in
cases of former high-ranking officials in
relation to crimes committed during the
1992-1995 conflict. In March, the ICTY
Amnesty International Report 2016/17found Radovan Karadžić, the wartime
President of RS, guilty of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity and
sentenced him to 40 years’ imprisonment.
Also in March, the ICTY found Vojislav Seselj,
the Serb Radical Party leader, not guilty on
any counts of crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
Lack of capacity and resources, along with
ineffective case management and persistent
political obstruction, continued to slow down
the progress of prosecution and access to
redress before domestic courts. In July, an
independent analysis commissioned by the
OSCE showed that the National War Crimes
Strategy had failed to meet its targets, with a
backlog of over 350 complex cases still
pending before the State Court and
Prosecutor’s Office.
Despite earlier commitments by the
authorities, no progress was made on the
adoption of the Law on Protection of Victims
of Torture and the harmonization of entity
laws regulating the rights of civilian victims
of war to enable their effective access to
services, free legal aid and effective
reparation.
In October, a local court in Doboj city
granted financial compensation to a victim of
wartime rape and sentenced the perpetrator
to five years’ imprisonment. This was the
second case of financial reparations for war
crimes awarded within a criminal proceeding.
However, many victims continued to be
forced to pursue compensation claims in civil
proceedings, where they had to reveal their
identity and incurred additional costs. In
April, the Constitutional Court declared that
the statute of limitations applied to reparation
claims for non-material damage and that
claims could be directed only against the
perpetrators, not the state, further limiting
the ability of victims to claim and obtain
compensation.
Although more than 75% of the missing
persons from the war had been exhumed
and identified, there were still 8,000 people
missing in connection with the conflict. The
process of exhumations encountered
significant challenges, including reduced
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
funding for the Missing Persons Institute and
limited expertise domestically. The Law on
Missing Persons remained unimplemented,
with the Fund for the families of missing
persons still awaiting establishment.
BOTSWANA
Republic of Botswana
Head of state and government: Seretse Khama Ian
Khama
The rights to freedom of expression and of
assembly were restricted. The rights of
refugees were violated. Lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
people continued to have their rights
infringed. One prisoner under sentence of
death was executed.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression was
restricted. In March, police arrested freelance
journalist Sonny Serite after a whistleblower
gave him documents that related to a
corruption case he was covering. Sonny
Serite was charged with receiving stolen
property; the charges were withdrawn in
June. The Whistle Blower Act, which
provided no protection to whistleblowers who
contacted the media, came into effect on
16 December.
In August, Lobatse High Court ruled that
Outsa Mokone, editor of the Sunday Standard
newspaper, could be charged with sedition.
His lawyers had argued that sections of the
Penal Code covering sedition infringed his
right to freedom of expression and breached
the Constitution. Outsa Mokone was arrested
in 2014 after an article in the Sunday
Standard alleged the involvement of
Botswana’s President in a road accident.
The article’s author, Edgar Tsimane, fled to
South Africa fearing for his life and was
granted asylum.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was curtailed. The Public Order Act required
89a police permit to protest, but applications
are sometimes rejected. In June, youth
activist Tlamelo Tsurupe was arrested and
held briefly after protesting against youth
unemployment in front of parliament and
refusing to move. He subsequently launched
#UnemploymentMovement. In July, the
movement applied for a permit to protest but
this was rejected. Despite this, on 8 August
the group protested outside parliament. They
were beaten by police and four were arrested
and held overnight at Central Police Station
on charges of “common nuisance”. Two of
the four needed medical assistance. The
police also arrested three journalists covering
the protest and forced them to hand over
video footage of the protest. The police
subsequently granted a permit for a
demonstration, which took place on
13 August.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Same-sex sexual relationships remained
illegal. In August, a man charged under
Section 164 of the Penal Code with “having
carnal knowledge with another man against
the order of nature” was sentenced to three
and a half years in prison by Gaborone
Magistrates Court. The Botswana Network on
Ethics, Law and HIV/AIDS (BONELA), which
submitted an appeal, argued that Section
164 discriminates on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity. The appeal
had not been heard by the end of 2016.
In March, in a landmark case, the
Lesbians, Gays and Bisexuals of Botswana
(LEGABIBO) won its appeal in the High Court
to register as an independent organization.
The LEGABIBO had been denied registration
by the Home Affairs Ministry since 2012.
The High Court ruled that the refusal to
register LEGABIBO violated the applicants’
rights to freedom of expression, association
and assembly.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
a 16-year-old girl. A case of defilement could
not be brought against him because the
Penal Code defines defilement as a sexual
act with a child aged under 16. No
disciplinary action was known to have been
taken by the councillor’s political party, the
Botswana Democratic Party.
RIGHT TO HEALTH – MINEWORKERS
On 7 October, the government closed without
warning or consultation the BCL and Tati
Nickel mines. The sudden closures
threatened anti-retroviral therapy treatment
and counselling services for mineworkers
living with HIV/AIDS as the government failed
to make alternative health care provisions. It
also left over 4,700 mineworkers uncertain
about their retrenchment benefits.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The encampment policy, which restricts
refugees to the Dukwe camp 547km from the
capital, Gaborone, continued to limit
refugees’ freedom of movement.
The government announced that it had
revoked the refugee status of Namibians from
31 December 2015, even though Namibians
who had fled conflict in the Caprivi region of
Namibia in 1998 still faced persecution
there. Refugees who returned to Namibia in
late 2015 were convicted of charges ranging
from high treason to illegally exiting Namibia.
Later in January 2016, the Botswana High
Court ruled that Namibian refugees should
not be repatriated until a legal case brought
against the revocation order had been
decided. The High Court judgment was
upheld on appeal in March.
DEATH PENALTY
In May, Patrick Gabaakanye was executed for
a murder committed in 2014. This brought to
49 the total number of people executed since
independence in 1966. Executions were
conducted in secret. Families were given no
notice and were denied access to the
burial site.
Sexual abuse of women and girls was
reported. A councillor of the city of Sebina
was accused of molesting and impregnating
90
Amnesty International Report 2016/17BRAZIL
Federative Republic of Brazil
Head of state and government: Michel Temer (replaced
Dilma Rousseff in August)
Police continued to use unnecessary and
excessive force, particularly in the context
of protests. Young people and black men,
mainly those living in favelas and other
marginalized communities, were
disproportionately targeted with violence by
law enforcement officials. Human rights
defenders, especially those defending land
and environmental rights, faced increased
threats and attacks. Violence against
women and girls remained widespread.
Human rights violations and discrimination
against refugees, asylum-seekers and
migrants intensified.
BACKGROUND
On 31 August, President Dilma Rousseff was
impeached after a long process in Congress,
after which Vice-President Michel Temer took
office. The new government announced
several measures and proposals with the
potential to impact human rights, including a
constitutional amendment (PEC 241/55)
capping government expenses over the next
20 years that could negatively affect
investments in education, health and other
areas. The amendment was approved in the
House of Representatives and the Senate
and was heavily criticized by the UN
Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and
human rights.
In Congress, several proposals that would
impinge on the rights of women, Indigenous
Peoples, children, and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) individuals
were pending discussion. In September a
special commission in the House of
Representatives approved changes to family
law to define family as the union between a
man and a woman.
Brazil had not yet ratified the Arms Trade
Treaty nor signed the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Brazil played a significant role in
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
ongoing negotiations for a treaty that
would ban nuclear weapons, to be finalized
in 2017.
In December, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights convicted the Brazilian state
for tolerating slave labour and trafficking of
people, based on conditions of farm workers
in the northern state of Pará.
PUBLIC SECURITY
Homicides and gun violence remained high
throughout the country, with estimates
putting the number of victims of homicides in
2015 at over 58,000. The authorities failed to
propose a plan to address the situation.
On 29 January, 10 people were killed and
15 wounded by gunmen in the city of
Londrina, Paraná state. Six of the seven
people detained during the investigation into
the incident were military police officers.
In March, following her visit to Brazil, the
UN Special Rapporteur on minority issues
presented to the Human Rights Council her
recommendations that both the military
police and the automatic classification of
killings by the police as “resistance followed
by death” – which presumes that the police
acted in self-defence and does not lead to
any investigation – be abolished.
In September the federal government
authorized the deployment of armed forces in
the state of Rio Grande do Norte to support
the police after several days of attacks by
criminal gangs on buses and public
buildings. At least 85 people were detained
for allegedly participating in the attacks.
On 18 November, seven men were shot
dead in Imperatriz, Maranhão, after an off-
duty military police officer had been targeted
for attempted robbery and physical assault.
2016 Olympic Games
The authorities and organizers of the 2016
Olympic Games failed to implement
necessary measures to prevent human rights
violations by security forces before and
during the sporting event. 1 This led to a
repetition of violations witnessed during other
major sporting events hosted in the city of Rio
91de Janeiro, namely the Pan American Games
in 2007 and the FIFA World Cup in 2014.
Tens of thousands of military and security
officers were deployed around Rio de
Janeiro. The number of people killed by the
police in the city of Rio de Janeiro in the
immediate run-up to the games between
April and June increased by 103% compared
to the same period in 2015.
During the Olympic Games (5-21 August),
police operations intensified in specific areas
of Rio de Janeiro, including the favelas of
Acari, Cidade de Deus, Borel, Manguinhos,
Alemão, Maré, Del Castilho and Cantagalo.
Residents reported hours of intensive
shootings and human rights abuses including
unlawful searches of homes, threats and
physical assaults. The police admitted to
killing at least 12 people during the Games in
the city of Rio de Janeiro and to engaging in
217 shootings during police operations in the
state of Rio de Janeiro. 2
During the Olympic torch relay throughout
the country, peaceful protests in Angra dos
Reis and Duque de Caxias – both in Rio de
Janeiro state – were met with unnecessary
and excessive use of force by the police.
Rubber bullets, stun grenades and tear gas
were used indiscriminately against peaceful
protesters and passers-by, including children.
On 10 May, the so-called “General Law of
the Olympics” (13.284/2016) was signed by
President Rousseff, amid concerns that it
might impose undue restrictions to freedoms
of expression and peaceful assembly,
contrary to international human rights
standards. Under the provisions of the new
law, dozens of people were expelled from
sports facilities for wearing T-shirts with
slogans, carrying flags, or other signs of
protest during the first days of the Games. On
8 August, a federal court ruled against the
prohibition of peaceful protests inside the
Olympic facilities.
On 5 August, the day of the opening
ceremony, a peaceful protest over the
negative impacts of the Games took place
near Maracanã stadium, Rio de Janeiro, and
was repressed with unnecessary force by the
police, who used tear gas to disperse
92
protesters in a square where children were
playing. Most police officers policing the
protest were not properly identified as such.
On 12 August, also near Maracanã
stadium, a protest led mainly by students was
severely repressed by the military police, who
used unnecessary and excessive force.
Around 50 protesters, mostly under the age
of 18, were detained and one was injured. At
the end of the year some of the detainees
were being investigated under the Fan
Defence Statute, which makes it a crime to
disturb order or provoke violence within a
5km radius of a sports facility.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Killings by the police remained high and
increased in some states. In the state of Rio
de Janeiro, 811 people were killed by the
police between January and November.
There were reports of several police
operations which resulted in killings, most of
them in favelas. A few measures were
adopted to curb police violence in Rio de
Janeiro but had yet to produce an impact.
Following a resolution from the National
Council of Public Prosecution, on 5 January
the Public Prosecution Office of Rio de
Janeiro state created a working group to
oversee police activities and the investigation
of killings committed by the police. The Civil
Police announced that the investigations of
all cases of killings by the police would be
progressively transferred to the specialized
homicide division.
Most cases of killings by the police
remained unpunished. Twenty years after the
unlawful killing of a two-year-old during a
military police operation in 1996 in the favela
of Acari, Rio de Janeiro city, no one had been
held to account. On 15 April the statute of
limitations for the crime expired. In October
the first public hearing with regard to the
killings of 26 people during police operations
in the favela Nova Brasilia, Rio de Janeiro
city, in October 1994 and May 1995 was held
before the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights. The killings had yet to be investigated
and nobody had been brought to justice.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17In July the Attorney General requested that
the investigation into the killing of 12 people
by the police in February 2015 in Cabula,
Bahia state, be transferred to a federal
authority.
On 6 November, five men, who had
disappeared on 21 October after being
approached by law enforcement officials,
were found dead in Mogi das Cruzes, São
Paulo. The bodies showed signs of
executions and initial investigations by
authorities indicated the involvement of
municipal guards.
On 17 November, four young men were
shot dead by the military police unit ROTA in
Jabaquara, São Paulo.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 1 February, 12 military police officers
were found guilty and sentenced for the
crimes of torture followed by death,
procedural fraud and “occultation of a
corpse” in the case of the enforced
disappearance of Amarildo de Souza in Rio
de Janeiro.
In April, police investigations named 23
military police officers as suspects in the
enforced disappearance of 16-year-old Davi
Fiuza in the city of Salvador, Bahia state, in
October 2014. However, the case failed to
reach the Public Prosecutor’s Office and
none of the accused had faced trial by the
end of 2016.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prisons remained severely overcrowded, with
reports of torture and other ill-treatment.
According to the Ministry of Justice, by the
end of 2015 the prison system had a
population of more than 620,000, although
the overall capacity was around 370,000
people.
Prison riots took place throughout the
country. In October, 10 men were beheaded
or burned alive in a prison in Roraima state
and eight men died of asphyxiation in a cell
during a prison fire in Rondônia state.
On 8 March the UN Special Rapporteur on
torture reported, among other things, poor
living conditions and the regular occurrence
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
of torture and other ill-treatment of inmates
by police and prison guards in Brazil.
In September a court of appeals declared
null a trial and sentences against 74 police
officers for a massacre in Carandiru prison in
1992; 111 men had been killed by the police
in the massacre.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The year was marked by a number of largely
peaceful protests throughout the country on
issues such as the impeachment process,
education reform, violence against women,
negative impacts of the 2016 Olympic Games
and reduction of public spending in health
care and education. The police response was
frequently violent, leading to excessive and
unnecessary use of force.
Students peacefully occupied up to 1,000
public schools in the country to question the
education reform and investment cuts
proposed by the government. In June, police
in the city of Rio de Janeiro used
unnecessary and excessive force to break up
a peaceful protest by students in the
Secretary of Education headquarters.
The police used unnecessary force in
several states to disperse demonstrations
against the new government and the
proposed constitutional amendment (PEC
241/55) that would restrict public spending.
In São Paulo, a student lost the vision in her
left eye after the police launched a stun
grenade that exploded near her.
In January, Rafael Braga Vieira, a man
who had been detained after a protest in Rio
de Janeiro in 2013, was again detained on
trumped-up charges of drug trafficking.
On 10 August a state court failed to
acknowledge the state’s responsibility for the
loss of vision in one eye of Sergio Silva after
he was hit by a device shot by police during a
2013 protest in São Paulo. The court
considered that, by being at the protest, he
had implicitly accepted the risk of being
injured by the police.
In March the Anti-terrorism Law
(13.260/2016) was approved in Congress
and sanctioned by the President. The law
was widely criticized for its vague language
93and for leaving a margin for its arbitrary
application in social protests.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Attacks, threats and killings targeting human
rights defenders increased compared to
2015. At least 47 defenders were killed
between January and September – including
small-scale farmers, peasants, rural workers,
Indigenous Peoples including quilombola
communities, fisherfolk, riverside dwellers
and lawyers – in their fight for access to land
and natural resources. Killings, threats and
attacks against human rights defenders
were rarely investigated and remained
largely unpunished.
Despite the existence of a national policy
and a programme for the protection of
human rights defenders, shortcomings in the
programme’s implementation and a lack of
resources meant that human rights
defenders continued to be killed or
threatened. In June the suspension of several
agreements between governments at federal
and state levels to implement the programme
as well as spending cuts further undermined
its effectiveness.
April marked the 20th anniversary of the
Eldorado dos Carajás massacre, when 19
landless farm workers were killed and 69
wounded during a brutal operation involving
more than 150 police officers in the
southeast of Pará state. Only two
commanders of the operation were convicted
of murder and assault. No police officers or
other authorities were held responsible. Since
the massacre, more than 271 rural workers
and leaders were killed in Pará alone.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The demarcation and titling processes of
Indigenous Peoples’ land continued to make
extremely slow progress, despite the expiry
23 years ago of the constitutional deadline for
doing so. A constitutional amendment (PEC
215) that would allow legislators to block land
demarcations – thus effectively vetoing
Indigenous Peoples’ rights under the
Constitution and international law – was
under discussion in Congress. Demarcation
94
of land was in some cases blocked by large-
scale landowners using the land for export-
led commodities production.
The survival of the Guarani Kaiowá
community of Apika ́y in the state of Mato
Grosso do Sul was at serious risk. In July, the
Apika ́y community was forcibly evicted from
its ancestral lands. Although the community
had been notified of the eviction, it was
neither consulted nor provided with any
relocation options. Apika ́y families were left
living on the margins of a highway, with
restricted access to water and food.
In October, an inquiry by the Federal
Prosecution Office concluded that the
murder of Terena Oziel Gabriel, an
Indigenous man, was caused by a bullet shot
by the federal police in a 2013 operation at
the Buriti farm, in the state of Mato Grosso
do Sul.
During a visit in March, the UN Special
Rapporteur on the rights of Indigenous
Peoples denounced Brazil’s failure to
demarcate Indigenous land and the
undermining of state institutions charged with
protecting Indigenous Peoples’ rights.
REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS
AND MIGRANTS
There were approximately 1.2 million asylum-
seekers, refugees and migrants living in the
country as of October. The government failed
to dedicate adequate resources and efforts to
meet asylum-seekers’ needs, such as
processing their requests for asylum. The
average request for asylum took at least two
years to process – leaving asylum-seekers in
legal limbo during that time.
In December the House of Representatives
approved a new migration law safeguarding
the rights of asylum-seekers, migrants and
stateless persons; the law was under
evaluation in the Senate at the end of
the year.
Asylum-seekers and migrants reported
having routinely suffered discrimination when
trying to access public services such as
health care and education.
During the year, in Roraima state, 455
Venezuelan nationals – including many
Amnesty International Report 2016/17children – were deported, many without
access to due process of law.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In May the interim federal government
dissolved the Ministry of Women’s Affairs,
Racial Equality and Human Rights and
reduced it to a department within the Ministry
of Justice, causing a significant reduction of
resources and programmes dedicated to
safeguarding women’s and girls’ rights.
A number of studies during the year
showed that lethal violence against
women had increased by 24% over the
previous decade and confirmed that Brazil
was one of the worst Latin American
countries in which to be a girl – especially
due to extremely high levels of gender-based
violence and teenage pregnancy, and low
completion rates of secondary education.
The gang rapes of a girl on 21 May and a
woman on 17 October in Rio de
Janeiro state, drew nationwide attention,
further confirming the state’s failure to
respect, protect and fulfil women’s and girls’
human rights. Between January and
November, there were 4,298 cases of rape
reported in the state of Rio de Janeiro, 1,389
of those in the capital.
The year also marked one decade since
legislation against domestic violence came
into force. The government failed to
rigorously implement the law, however, with
domestic violence and impunity for it
remaining widespread.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In August, one adolescent died and another
six were seriously wounded in a fire in a
juvenile detention centre in the city of Rio de
Janeiro. In September, one adolescent who
had been hospitalized after the incident died
as a result of injuries. The number of
detainees in juvenile detention centres in Rio
de Janeiro increased by 48% during the year,
aggravating an already critical situation of
overcrowding, poor living conditions, as well
as torture and other ill-treatment.
A proposed constitutional amendment to
reduce the age at which children can be tried
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
as adults from 18 to 16 was still under
consideration in the Senate, despite being
approved by the House of Representatives
in 2015.
1. Brazil: Violence has no place in these games! Risk of human rights
violations at the Rio 2016 Olympic Games (AMR 19/4088/2016)
2. Brazil: A legacy of violence: Killings by police and repression of
protest at the Rio 2016 Olympics (AMR 19/4780/2016)
BRUNEI
DARUSSALAM
Brunei Darussalam
Head of state and government: Sultan Hassanal
Bolkiah
Lack of transparency made independent
monitoring of the human rights situation
difficult. The phased implementation of the
amended Penal Code continued. The Code,
which seeks to impose Shari’a law, provides
for the death penalty as well as corporal
punishment that amount to torture and
other ill-treatment for a range of offences. It
also contains provisions which discriminate
against women. The Shari’a legislation
completed its first phase of
implementation. Offences that are
punishable with whipping or death sentence
such as false claims (Article 206), deriding
verses of the Qur’an or Hadith by non-
Muslims (Article 111), and abetting or
attempt to abet, had not been enforced. In
February, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child urged the government to repeal
Penal Code amendments which would
impose the death penalty and corporal
punishment on children; and to raise the
minimum age for marriage.
DEATH PENALTY
Although abolitionist in practice, death by
hanging was maintained as punishment for a
number of offences including murder,
terrorism and drug-related crimes. The
amended Penal Code provided for
95punishment of death by stoning for both
Muslims and religious minorities for crimes
including “adultery”, “sodomy”, rape,
blasphemy and murder.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The staged implementation of the amended
Penal Code, which began in 2014, provides
for whipping or amputation for crimes such
as robbery and theft. Caning was regularly
used as a punishment for offences including
those related to immigration.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
A lack of free and independent media
continued. In November, The Brunei Times
was shut down after it published a politically
sensitive article. The act of “printing,
disseminating, importing, broadcasting, and
distributing publications contrary to Sharia
law” constituted a crime for both Muslims
and non-Muslims.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION
Muslims as well as religious minorities
continued to face restrictions on their right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
Crimes including blasphemy, insulting the
Hadith and any verses of the Qur’an,
declaring oneself a prophet or an apostate
(for Muslims) were punishable by death
under the law.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Consensual same-sex sexual activity was a
criminal offence with “intercourse against the
order of nature” punishable by up to 10
years’ imprisonment. The amended Penal
Code would make punishment of stoning to
death for “sodomy” mandatory. Article 198
cites “Man posing as woman or vice versa”
as a crime. In August, a man was arrested for
“cross-dressing and improper conduct”.
Punishment on conviction included a fine of
BN$1,000 (approx. US$730) or three
months’ imprisonment, or both.
96
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Individuals continued to be arrested under
the Internal Security Act which allows
authorities to detain suspects without trial for
indefinitely renewable two-year periods.
BULGARIA
Republic of Bulgaria
Head of State: Rosen Plevneliev
Head of Government: Boyko Borisov
Bulgaria failed to provide all required
services and access to proper procedures
for the rising number of migrants and
refugees arriving in the country and failed
to address the allegations of summary
pushbacks and abuse at the border. A
climate of xenophobia and intolerance
sharply intensified. Roma continued to be
at risk of pervasive discrimination. The
parliament adopted in first reading a new
counter-terrorism law.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In response to Serbia and Hungary
increasing their border control measures, the
Bulgarian authorities adopted an approach
aimed at limiting the number of migrants and
refugees entering the country as an
alternative route into the EU. Human rights
organizations documented frequent
allegations of pushbacks, physical abuse and
theft by border police. While not openly
condoning pushbacks, Prime Minister
Borisov conceded that the government had
adopted what he termed a “pragmatic
approach” to the refugee crisis. He said that
over 25,000 people were returned to Turkey
and Greece in the period up to August.
There was continued impunity for reported
abuses at the border. In July, Burgas District
Prosecutor’s Office closed criminal
proceedings in connection to the October
2015 death of an unarmed Afghan man who
was shot by border police.
The majority of migrants and refugees
continued to be routinely subject to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17administrative detention, often for months
longer than the legally prescribed period. Two
attempts to irregularly cross the border,
whether to enter or leave the country,
amounted to a criminal offence.
Consequently, migrants and refugees
apprehended while trying to leave the country
irregularly were prosecuted and jailed, some
for longer than a year.
Children
The practice of the unlawful detention of
unaccompanied children persisted. To
circumvent the prohibition of detention of
unaccompanied minors, migration authorities
arbitrarily assigned unaccompanied children
to adults who were not related to them.
Reception centres had inadequate
provisions for unaccompanied children. The
authorities routinely failed to provide
adequate access to legal representation,
translation, health services and education,
psychosocial support and a safe and secure
environment. Due to the lack of specially
designated facilities for children, many
unaccompanied children were held with
adults and without adequate professional
supervision, making them vulnerable to
sexual abuse, drug use and trafficking.
DISCRIMINATION
Xenophobia
Human rights organizations highlighted
concerns over high levels of xenophobia and
intolerance directed at groups including
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants, who
remained particularly vulnerable to violence
and harassment. The government failed to
challenge the climate of intolerance and
some public officials frequently engaged in
discriminatory or xenophobic speech.
In April, local and international media
aired footage of so-called “voluntary border
patrol” groups rounding up and holding
captive Iraqi and Afghan migrants attempting
to cross the border from Turkey before
handing them over to the police. These illegal
“citizens’ arrests” were initially widely praised
by the authorities and certain sectors of the
public. After formal complaints by the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, local police
arrested some of the perpetrators and the
Ministry of Interior issued statements asking
citizens to refrain from apprehending
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants.
Roma
Social exclusion and widespread
discrimination against Roma continued. The
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
expressed concern about the continued
limited access of Roma children to
education, health and adequate housing.
Roma remained grossly overrepresented in
“special” schools, mental health institutions
and juvenile detention centres. The
authorities continued to carry out forced
evictions without the provision of adequate
alternative housing, leaving many families
homeless.
Muslim women
In September, the National Assembly
approved a national law that prohibited
wearing full-face veils in public places. The
law was a part of the package of bills
proposed by the Patriotic Front, a member of
the ruling coalition, allegedly aimed at
preventing what was characterized as
radicalization. Other bills, still under
consideration at the end of the year,
proposed far-reaching measures, including
the prohibition of “radical Islam”, a complete
ban on foreign funding for all religious
denominations and a mandatory use of the
Bulgarian language during all religious
services. Earlier in the year, several regional
centres, such as Pazardzhik, imposed bans
on wearing full-face veils in public. Only a few
women in Bulgaria wear full-face veils or
burkas, but the national ban could impact
unfairly on women belonging to the ethnic
Turkish and Muslim Roma minorities.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In July, the National Assembly quickly passed
a new counter-terrorism bill that defined a
“terrorist act” vaguely and in excessively
broad terms. 1 The bill gives the President
powers to declare – with approval of the
97National Assembly – a “state of emergency”
in the aftermath of an act of terrorism against
the territory. In such a state of emergency,
the authorities could impose blanket bans on
public rallies, meetings and demonstrations
without any effective and independent
oversight. The bill additionally provided a list
of administrative control measures, including
travel bans and controls of individuals’
freedom of movement and association, that
could be applied to anyone suspected of
“preparing or planning a terrorist act”.
Non-refoulement
Bulgaria violated the international legal
principle of non-refoulement in August. The
police apprehended Abdullah Buyuk, a
Turkish national who had been residing in
Bulgaria since late 2015, and secretly
handed him over to Turkish authorities. The
authorities acted on the basis of an Interpol
warrant, issued at the request of the Turkish
government seeking Abdullah Buyuk’s
extradition on charges of money laundering
and terrorism in association with the Gulenist
movement. Abdullah Buyuk’s lawyer said that
he had not been given an opportunity to
contact legal counsel or his family, or
otherwise challenge the transfer. His request
for asylum in Bulgaria had been rejected only
days before the handover, which took place
despite two earlier court rulings blocking his
extradition. In March 2016, Sofia City Court
and the Bulgarian Court of Appeal had ruled
that Abdullah Buyuk should not be extradited
stating that the charges appeared to be
politically motivated and that Turkey could
not guarantee him a fair trial. The
Ombudsman’s Office stated publicly that
Abdullah Buyuk’s return to Turkey had
contravened the Bulgarian Constitution,
domestic law and Bulgaria’s international
legal obligations.
1. Bulgaria: Proposed counter-terrorism bill would be a serious step
back for human rights (EUR 15/4545/2016)
98
BURKINA FASO
Burkina Faso
Head of state: Roch Marc Christian Kaboré
Head of government: Paul Kaba Thiéba (replaced
Yacouba Isaac Zida in January)
The political turmoil of the previous two
years largely receded. Armed groups
committed abuses. The rates of maternal
mortality as well as early and forced
marriage remained high, although the
government began to address the issues.
BACKGROUND
In September the government established a
commission to draft a new Constitution to
usher in the “Fifth Republic”.
MILITARY TRIBUNAL
In June, the military tribunal indicted 14
people, including former President Blaise
Compaoré, suspected of involvement in the
assassination of President Thomas Sankara
in 1987. Seven people, including Colonel
Alidou Guebré and Caporal Wampasba
Nacouma, were arrested in October and
charged. In May, Burkina Faso issued an
international arrest warrant for the former
President and another of those indicted who
were living in exile.
Between July and October, 38 of 85
people charged with threatening state
security, crimes against humanity and
murder following a coup attempt in
September 2015 were provisionally released,
including journalists Caroline Yoda and
Adama Ouédraogo. Former Minister of
Foreign Affairs Djibril Bassolé and General
Gilbert Dienderé remained in custody
awaiting trial by the military tribunal. In April,
the authorities lifted the international arrest
warrant for Guillaume Soro, President of the
National Assembly of Côte d’Ivoire, who had
been investigated for alleged involvement in
the attempted coup.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Throughout the year, armed groups attacked
civilians and members of the security forces,
in the capital, Ouagadougou, and in the north
near the Malian border.
In January, an armed group deliberately
and indiscriminately killed and injured
civilians in an attack in Ouagadougou. Al-
Mourabitoune, a group affiliated to Al-Qa’ida
in the Islamic Maghreb, claimed
responsibility. At least 30 people were killed,
including a photographer and a driver
working on behalf of Amnesty International.
In May, June, October and December, the
authorities announced that armed groups
had attacked police stations near the Malian
border, killing 21 people in total and
wounding others.
Self-defence militia called “Kogleweogo”,
mainly comprising farmers and cattle
breeders, committed abuses, including
beatings and abductions. Civil society
organizations criticized the authorities for
doing too little to prevent and remedy such
abuses. The Minister of Justice pledged to
end the militias’ activities. In October, a
decree was adopted to regulate their
activities.
In September, four Kogleweogo members
charged in relation to an armed gathering
were sentenced to six months in prison, while
26 others were given suspended sentences
of between 10 and 12 months.
IMPUNITY
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee
stressed that the government should
redouble its efforts to fully and impartially
investigate all human rights violations
committed by armed forces, including the
Presidential Guard (RSP), sanction those
found guilty and provide remedy to the
victims.
The Commission of Inquiry established in
2015 to investigate the killing of at least 10
people and the wounding of hundreds by
security forces in October 2014 submitted its
report to the Prime Minister. The
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Commission’s conclusions were not made
public.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights stated that women in rural
areas were particularly disadvantaged
regarding economic, social and cultural
rights. The Committee recommended that
Burkina Faso revise its legislation on the
prevention and punishment of violence
against women and girls, and provide more
support to survivors. It also recommended
that all acts of rape by spouses be punished
and that the reporting of such offences be
encouraged.
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee
noted that more women should have
positions in public office.
Sexual and reproductive rights
Only 16% of women in Burkina Faso were
using a modern method of contraception and
nearly 30% of girls and young women aged
15-19 in rural areas were pregnant or already
had a child. Some women and girls reported
that they did not know that sexual intercourse
could lead to pregnancy. Many said the cost
of contraceptives prevented their use or
meant they did not use them consistently.
These factors resulted in high-risk and
unwanted pregnancies that sometimes led to
dangerous, clandestine abortions. 1
At least 2,800 women die in childbirth
annually in Burkina Faso. In March, the
authorities removed some key financial
barriers facing pregnant women, including
costs relating to caesarean sections and
delivery.
Early and forced marriage
Burkina Faso had one of the world’s highest
rates of early and forced marriage. Women
and girls reported that they were forced to
marry as a result of violence, coercion and
the pressure linked to the money and goods
offered to their families as part of the
marriage. In the Sahel region, more than half
of girls aged 15-17 were married.
99The authorities adopted a national strategy
to end child marriage by 2025. The plan
defines a child as someone under the age of
18, and considers “marriage” to include all
forms of union between a man and woman,
whether celebrated by a public officer or a
traditional or religious leader. However,
serious concerns remained about the legal
framework and weaknesses in enforcement
of the law.
1. Coerced and denied: Forced marriages and barriers to contraception
in Burkina Faso (AFR 60/3851/2016)
BURUNDI
Republic of Burundi
Head of state and government: Pierre Nkurunziza
The political crisis became less overtly
violent, although serious human rights
violations continued, including unlawful
killings, enforced disappearances, torture
and other ill-treatment and arbitrary arrests.
Violence against women and girls increased.
The rights to freedom of expression and
association were stifled. With increased
repression and unchallenged impunity, a
climate of fear took hold in the capital and
elsewhere. Around 3 million people needed
humanitarian assistance by the end of the
year due to the political crisis, the
collapsing economy and a series of natural
disasters.
BACKGROUND
The political crisis sparked by President
Nkurunziza’s decision in 2015 to stand for a
third term became increasingly entrenched
and was accompanied by a deepening socio-
economic crisis.
Mediation efforts under the auspices of the
East African Community stalled, despite the
appointment in March of former Tanzanian
President, Benjamin Mkapa, as facilitator.
The National Commission for Inter-Burundian
Dialogue reported that most participants had
called for constitutional amendments,
100
including the removal of term limits. With
many Burundians in exile or afraid to express
dissent, the Commission’s findings risked
being one-sided.
The AU stepped back from the protection
force proposed in December 2015 and
decided instead to send a delegation of five
African heads of state and government to
Burundi in February. In July, the UN Security
Council authorized the deployment of up to
228 police officers, a move rejected by
the government.
On appeal in May, the Supreme Court
sentenced 21 army and police officers to life
imprisonment for their involvement in the
failed coup attempt in May 2015. Five others
received two-year sentences and two were
acquitted. The sentences were heavier than
those handed down in January.
On 20 August, General Evariste
Ndayishimiye was elected Secretary General
of the ruling National Council for the Defense
of Democracy-Forces of Defense of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD).
After several months of consultations, the
EU decided in March to suspend direct
financial support to the government, pending
regular reviews. In October the EU judged
that commitments proposed by the
government to address its concerns were
insufficient to restart support. The EU
renewed sanctions against four men
“deemed to be undermining democracy or
obstructing the search for a political solution
to the crisis in Burundi” by inciting acts of
repression against peaceful demonstrations
or participating in the failed coup. Similarly,
the USA issued sanctions against a further
three people, bringing the total under US
sanctions to 11.
Access to basic services was hampered by
the insecurity and deteriorating economy.
Cuts to external financial assistance led to
massive budget cuts. Natural disasters,
including floods, landslides and storms,
exacerbated the situation. Humanitarian
organizations estimated that 3 million people
needed assistance in October, up from 1.1
million in February. A cholera epidemic was
Amnesty International Report 2016/17declared in August and cases of malaria were
almost double those seen in 2015.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Hundreds of people were unlawfully killed in
targeted and indiscriminate killings related to
the crisis. NGOs continued to report the
discovery of mass graves. Amnesty
International’s analysis of satellite images and
video footage from a site in Buringa near the
capital, Bujumbura, supported witness
accounts that people killed by security forces
in December 2015 were later buried in mass
graves. 1 In February, the Mayor of
Bujumbura showed the media a grave in the
Mutakura neighbourhood of the capital that
he alleged was dug by members of the
opposition. The government did not take up
offers from the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the UN
Independent Investigation on Burundi
(UNIIB) to help document alleged mass
graves.
In early 2016, there were regular grenade
explosions in Bujumbura followed by targeted
killings. On 22 March, Lieutenant Colonel
Darius Ikurakure, an army officer implicated
in numerous human rights violations, was
shot dead inside the army’s headquarters. On
25 April, gunmen fired on the car of General
Athanase Kararuza, killing him, his wife
Consolate Gahiro and his assistant Gérard
Vyimana and fatally wounding his daughter
Daniella Mpundu. The previous day Human
Rights Minister Martin Nivyabandi and Diane
Murindababisha were injured in an attack.
On 13 July, unidentified gunmen killed Hafsa
Mossi, a former minister and member of the
East African Legislative Assembly. A senior
presidential adviser, Willy Nyamitwe, was
injured in an assassination attempt on 28
November.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Reports of enforced disappearances, often
implicating the National Intelligence Services
(SNR), continued and numerous cases from
2015 remained unsolved.
Jean Bigirimana, a journalist with the
independent media outlet Iwacu, was last
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
seen on 22 July. 2 His colleague received a
phone call saying he had been taken by
people believed to be members of the SNR.
Two bodies in an advanced state of
decomposition were later found in a river;
neither could be identified.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued to
be perpetrated at an alarming rate and with
impunity by the SNR, the police and the
Imbonerakure, the youth wing of the ruling
party. Methods documented included:
beating with branches, iron bars and batons;
electric shocks; stamping on victims; denial
of medical care; verbal abuse; and death
threats. 3 People who refused to join the
Imbonerakure said they were beaten during
arrest and in detention, apparently as a
punishment. Others were beaten as they tried
to flee the country.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In November, the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women
expressed concern about an increase in
serious sexual and gender-based violence
against women and girls by the police,
military and Imbonerakure.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
There were regular police searches and
arrests in neighbourhoods of Bujumbura
where the 2015 protests had been
concentrated. In these neighbourhoods and
other parts of Burundi, police regularly
checked household notebooks in which
residents should be registered.
On 28 May, the police arrested several
hundred people in the Bwiza neighbourhood
of Bujumbura. A police spokesperson was
reported as saying that it was normal to arrest
people near a grenade attack as the
perpetrators might be found among them.
On 25 August, the police presented to the
media 93 people who had been arrested and
accused of begging as part of the “clean city”
operation.
101FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression was stifled at all levels
of society.
Hundreds of secondary school students
were suspended for doodling on a photo of
the President in their textbooks. In June
dozens of students were arrested and
accused of insulting the President, including
in Muramvya, Cankuzo and Rumonge
provinces. Two were charged with
participating in an insurrectionary movement
and mobilizing students to demonstrate. The
rest were released by mid-August.
Burundian and international journalists
faced persecution, despite the reopening of
two private radio stations in February. Phil
Moore and Jean-Philippe Rémy, who were
working for the French newspaper Le Monde,
were arrested in January. Julia Steers, an
American journalist; Gildas Yihundimpundu,
a Burundian journalist; and their Burundian
driver were arrested on 23 October. Julia
Steers was taken to the US Embassy the
same day, but Gildas Yihundimpundu and
the driver were held overnight at the SNR.
Léon Masengo, a journalist with Isanganiro
FM, was briefly detained on 11 November
after he went to cover the interrogation of a
police officer accused of many human
rights violations.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Members of opposition political parties faced
repression.
In March, at least 16 members of National
Liberation Forces (FNL) party were arrested
at a bar in Kirundo province. The police said
they were holding an unauthorized political
meeting. Local opposition party leaders who
opposed President Nkurunziza’s re-election
were beaten and threatened by the
Imbonerakure. Throughout the country, the
Imbonerakure put pressure on people to join
it or the ruling CNDD-FDD, and carried out
campaigns of intimidation against those
who refused.
In December, the national assembly
adopted two laws on national and foreign
102
NGOs which will impose stricter controls on
their work.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights work became increasingly
dangerous and difficult. The SNR increased
surveillance of human rights defenders and
other perceived government critics. Victims
and witnesses of violations were afraid to
speak out.
In October, the Minister of Interior banned
five leading human rights organizations that
had been suspended in 2015. The Minister
suspended five others the following week,
one of which, Lique Iteka (the Burundian
Human Rights League) was permanently
closed in December, following the publication
of a controversial report.
Following the review of Burundi by the UN
Committee against Torture in July, a
Burundian prosecutor called on the Bar
Association to strike off four lawyers who
contributed to the civil society report
submitted to the Committee. Pamela Capizzi
of Switzerland-based TRIAL International, an
NGO, was asked to leave the country on 6
October despite having a visa.
LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY
Victims of human rights violations continued
to face serious challenges in accessing
justice. Journalist Esdras Ndikumana was
tortured in August 2015 and filed a complaint
at the Supreme Court in October 2015. No
progress was made in the case in 2016.
Judicial investigations continued to lack
credibility. In March, the Prosecutor General
announced the findings of a commission of
inquiry into alleged extrajudicial executions
committed on 11 December 2015 and the
subsequent discovery of suspected mass
graves. According to the report, all but one
person found dead in the Bujumbura
neighbourhoods of Musaga, Ngagara and
Nyakabiga had participated in the fighting.
While an exchange of fire did take place on
11 December, this was followed by cordon-
and-search operations in which many people
were killed by a bullet to the head and at
least one body was found tied up.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17The operational phase of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which covers
1962 to 2008, was launched in March and
began collecting testimonies in September. It
does not have judicial authority and the
special tribunal that was initially envisaged
was not established.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Approximately 100,000 people fled Burundi
in 2016, bringing the total number of
Burundian refugees who had fled the
ongoing crisis to over 327,000. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) estimated that 139,000 people were
internally displaced due to the crisis and
natural disasters.
People trying to flee were abused and
robbed. Members of the Imbonerakure
were largely responsible, although refugees
also accused people in police and
military uniforms.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women expressed
concern about: the high secondary school
drop-out rate for girls; women’s limited
access to basic health care and sexual and
reproductive health services; the continued
criminalization of abortion; and the fact that
45% of incarcerated women were serving
sentences for abortion and infanticide. The
Committee highlighted the concentration of
women working in the informal sector in
unskilled and low-paid jobs without social
protection. It also noted the lack of protection
of domestic workers from exploitation
and sexual abuse, and the failure to ban
child labour.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
The situation in Burundi came under intense
scrutiny by international and regional bodies,
and the government became increasingly
hostile in its responses to such initiatives.
In February, the government agreed to an
increase in the number of AU human rights
observers and military experts to 200. By the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
end of the year, only a third of these had
been deployed and a memorandum of
understanding was yet to be signed.
In April, the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights presented to the
AU’s Peace and Security Council the report of
its December 2015 fact-finding mission to
Burundi. Its recommendations included the
establishment of a joint regional and
international investigative mechanism.
The UN Committee against Torture
requested a special report from Burundi,
which was reviewed in July. The government
delegation only attended half of the review
and did not respond to questions. However, it
did submit further feedback in October.
The UNIIB presented its report to the
Human Rights Council (HRC) in September. 4
It found that gross, systematic and patterned
human rights violations were taking place
and that impunity was pervasive. To follow
up, the HRC established a commission of
inquiry on Burundi. Burundi rejected this
move and, in October, banned the three
UNIIB experts from Burundi and suspended
co-operation with the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights pending renegotiation.
In April, the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) opened a
preliminary examination into the situation in
Burundi. On 8 October, both the National
Assembly and the Senate voted to leave the
ICC. 5 The UN Secretary-General received
official notification of Burundi’s withdrawal
from the Rome Statute of the ICC on 27
October, which will come into effect after
a year.
1. Burundi: Suspected mass graves of victims of 11 December violence
(AFR 16/3337/2016)
2. Burundi: Whereabouts of Burundian journalist unknown − Jean
Bigirimana (AFR 16/4832/2016)
3. Burundi: Submission to the United Nations Committee against
Torture, 25 July-12 August 2016 (AFR 16/4377/2016)
4. Burundi: Written Statement to the 33rd session of the UN Human
Rights Council (AFR 16/4737/2016)
5. Burundi: ICC withdrawal must not block justice for crisis abuses
(News story, 12 October)
103CAMBODIA
Kingdom of Cambodia
Head of state: King Norodom Sihamoni
Head of government: Hun Sen
Crackdown on the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly intensified ahead of elections in
2017/2018. The authorities’ misuse of the
justice system increased; the security forces
continued to harass and punish civil society
and silence critics. Human rights defenders
were arrested and held in pre-trial
detention; several were tried and sentenced,
including for previous alleged offences, and
others were given suspended sentences or
had charges pending against them. Political
opposition was targeted, with activists
serving long sentences handed down in
previous years and new legal action taken
against opposition party leaders and others.
A prominent political commentator was shot
dead and impunity continued for past
unlawful killings.
BACKGROUND
Tensions between the ruling Cambodian
People’s Party (CPP) and the main opposition
Cambodian National Rescue Party (CNRP)
remained high. The prospect of commune
and national elections in 2017 and 2018
respectively created an unstable political
environment threatening human rights. From
May, CNRP MPs intermittently boycotted the
National Assembly in protest at legal action
taken against CNRP deputy leader Kem
Sokha for failing to appear as a witness in a
court case. CNRP leader Sam Rainsy
remained in self-imposed exile in France; in
October the government formally announced
that he was banned from returning to
Cambodia. He was targeted with a series of
criminal charges against him during the year.
In September, 39 states issued a
statement at the 33rd UN Human Rights
Council meeting expressing concern about
the political situation in Cambodia and calling
104
for a “safe and enabling environment for
human rights defenders and civil society”.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSOCIATION
Legal action against the political opposition
escalated in an apparent attempt to hamper
activities ahead of commune elections in
2017. At least 16 activists and officials from
the opposition remained in prison after unfair
trials. They included 14 CNRP members who
were convicted of leading and/or participating
in an “insurrection” related to a
demonstration in July 2014. At least two
opposition party members were held in pre-
trial detention and at least 13 had charges
pending against them.
In December, Sam Rainsy and two
assistants were sentenced to five years’
imprisonment on charges of being
“accomplices” in a 2015 forgery case against
opposition party senator Hong Sok Hour, who
was convicted in November 2016 on charges
of fraud and incitement and given a seven-
year prison sentence. Rainsy and the two
assistants are in exile in France.
In September, Kem Sokha was
sentenced in his absence to five months’
imprisonment for refusing to appear as a
witness in the prosecution of two CNRP MPs
who were charged with “procurement of
prostitution”. He was pardoned by the King in
December at the Prime Minister’s request.
In October, CNRP MP Um Sam An was
sentenced to two and a half years’
imprisonment for incitement related to the
CNRP campaign alleging encroachment by
Viet Nam into Cambodian territory.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders were threatened and
arrested for peacefully carrying out their
work. Intimidation, threats and heavy
surveillance caused several to leave the
country in fear for their safety.
In May, a landmark case was brought
against Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda and
Lem Mony, staff members from the
Cambodian Human Rights and Development
Association (ADHOC) who were arrested on
Amnesty International Report 2016/1728 April and charged with bribing a witness.
Ny Chakrya, a former ADHOC staff member
and deputy secretary-general of the National
Election Committee (NEC), was also charged
as an accomplice. The case was related to
advice and material support provided by
ADHOC to a woman alleged to have had an
extra-marital relationship with Kem Sokha. In
October, the investigating judge extended
their pre-trial detention to one year. In
December, Minister of Interior Sar Kheng
announced that the five would be released
but no action was taken. The alleged affair
led to three separate criminal cases involving
eight political and civil society actors, as well
as one against the woman. The CPP filed a
criminal defamation complaint against
political commentator Ou Virak for
commenting that the cases were politically
motivated. Seang Chet, an opposition
commune councillor, was convicted on
charges of bribery in one of these cases in
December. He received a five-year sentence
but was pardoned and released two days
later.
In a separate case, Ny Chakrya was
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for
defamation, malicious denunciation and
publication of commentaries intended to
unlawfully coerce judicial authorities after
criticizing a court in Siem Reap for its
handling of a land dispute case in May 2015.
In April, NEC member and former union
leader Rong Chhun was informed that he
would be tried on criminal charges in relation
to a 2014 demonstration at which a number
of protesting factory workers were shot dead
by security forces. Ny Chakrya and Rong
Chhun both worked for the NEC and their
cases were viewed as targeted attempts to
exclude them from their appointed positions.
Try Sovikea, Sun Mala and Sim Samnang,
environmental activists from the NGO Mother
Nature who had been arrested in August
2015, were sentenced in June to 18 months’
imprisonment for threatening to destroy
property. They were released after the
balance of their sentence after time served
was suspended.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Peaceful protests continued to be hampered
by the authorities. In May, civil society
launched a peaceful “Black Monday”
campaign to call for the release of four
ADHOC staff and one former NEC staff
member (see above). Protesters wearing
black took part in weekly gatherings and
vigils, and posted images on social media.
The authorities attempted to ban the protests
and threatened, arrested and detained
participants who were generally released only
after signing undertakings not to protest
again. Housing rights activists from the
capital, Phnom Penh, were among those
routinely targeted.
Tep Vanny and Bov Sophea from Boeung
Kak community were arrested on 15 August
at a “Black Monday” vigil. They were tried on
22 August and sentenced to six days’
imprisonment each for insulting a public
official. Bov Sophea was released after time
served, and Tep Vanny was held in prison for
investigation on a revived charge relating to a
2013 protest. In another revived case, on 19
September, Tep Vanny, Bo Chhorvy, Heng
Mom and Kong Chantha, also from the
Boeung Kak community, were sentenced to
six months’ imprisonment for insulting and
obstructing public officials in relation to a
2011 protest. Tep Vanny remained
imprisoned and the three other women
remained free pending an appeal against
conviction at the end of the year.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Political commentator Kem Ley was shot
dead on the morning of 10 July at a service
station where he regularly went to meet
people. He was frequently interviewed on
radio and news media for his views on
political events in Cambodia, including
criticism of the government. Oeuth Ang, a
former soldier, was arrested shortly
afterwards, but the authorities failed to
conduct an independent and effective
investigation or to inform the public
adequately of any investigations into the
killing. Prime Minister Hun Sen filed a
105defamation suit against Sam Rainsy after the
latter had posted on Facebook that the
government may have been behind the
killing. Opposition senator Thak Lany was
convicted in her absence of defamation and
incitement for allegedly accusing Hun Sen of
ordering the killing.
No progress was made in holding anyone
to account for the killings of at least six
people and the enforced disappearance of
Khem Saphath during a violent crackdown by
security forces on freedom of peaceful
assembly in 2013 and 2014. A renewed
investigation ordered in 2013 into the fatal
shooting of trade union leader Chea Vichea
by unidentified perpetrators in January 2004
also appeared to be making no progress.
RIGHT TO ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
Land grabbing, Economic Land Concessions
granted to private stakeholders, and major
development projects continued to impact
the right to adequate housing for
communities around the country. Work on
the proposed Lower Sesan II hydropower
dam in the northeast province of Stung Treng
progressed, with estimates that around 5,000
members of Indigenous minorities faced
relocation due to inundation. The UN Special
Rapporteur on Cambodia called for adequate
consultation, better understanding of cultural
practices and consideration of alternatives
proposed by the communities.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In January the Ministry of Interior confirmed
that more than 170 Montagnard asylum-
seekers who had fled Viet Nam would have
their claims assessed for refugee status, after
initially refusing to do so. Thirteen who had
earlier been granted refugee status were
transferred to the Philippines pending
resettlement to a third country. During the
year, around 29 returned to Viet Nam
voluntarily with assistance from UNHCR, the
UN refugee agency.
106
CAMEROON
Republic of Cameroon
Head of state: Paul Biya
Head of government: Philémon Yang
The armed group Boko Haram continued to
commit serious human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law
in the Far North region, including killing
and abducting hundreds of civilians. In
response, the authorities and security forces
committed human rights violations,
including arbitrary arrests, incommunicado
detentions, torture and enforced
disappearances. As a result of the conflict,
more than 170,000 people had fled their
homes since 2014. Freedoms of expression,
association and peaceful assembly
continued to be restricted. Demonstrations
in Anglophone regions from late October
were violently repressed by the security
forces. Journalists, students, human rights
defenders and members of opposition
parties were arrested and some faced trial
before military courts. Lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
people faced discrimination, intimidation
and harassment, although the number of
arrests and prosecutions continued to fall.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS –
BOKO HARAM
Boko Haram committed crimes under
international law and human rights abuses,
including suicide bombings in civilian areas,
summary executions, torture, hostage-taking,
abductions, recruitment of child soldiers,
looting and destruction of public, private and
religious property. During the year, the group
carried out at least 150 attacks, including 22
suicide bombings, killing at least 260
civilians. The crimes were part of a
systematic attack on the civilian population
across the Lake Chad basin.
Boko Haram deliberately targeted civilians
in attacks on markets, mosques, churches,
schools and bus stations. In January alone, at
least nine suicide attacks killed more than 60
Amnesty International Report 2016/17civilians. On 10 February in the town of
Nguéchéwé, 60km from Maroua, two women
suicide bombers attacked a funeral, killing at
least nine civilians, including a child, and
injuring more than 40 people. On 19
February, two women suicide bombers killed
at least 24 civilians and injured 112 others in
a crowded market in the village of Mémé,
near Mora. Suicide bombings on 21 August
and 25 December killed a total of five people
and wounded at least 34 at markets in Mora.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Security forces continued to arbitrarily arrest
individuals accused of supporting Boko
Haram, often with little or no evidence, and
detained them in inhumane, often life-
threatening conditions. Hundreds of suspects
were held in unofficial detention centres,
such as military bases or premises belonging
to the national intelligence agencies, without
access to a lawyer or their families.
The security forces continued to use
“cordon and search” operations, leading to
mass arrests.
TORTURE, DEATHS IN CUSTODY AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Dozens of men, women and children
accused of supporting Boko Haram were
tortured by members of the Rapid
Intervention Battalion (BIR), an elite army
unit, at the military base known as Salak,
near Maroua, and by officers of the General
Directorate of External Research (DGRE), an
intelligence service, in premises in the
capital, Yaoundé. Some of them died as a
result of torture; others disappeared. 1
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Human rights defenders, including civil
society activists and journalists, continued to
be intimidated, harassed and threatened. In
response to curtailed freedoms of expression,
association and peaceful assembly,
journalists reported that they self-censored to
avoid repercussions for criticizing the
government, especially on security matters.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Kah Walla, President of the Cameroon
People’s Party, was victim of several arbitrary
arrests. On 8 April, she was detained along
with 11 members of her party at the Judicial
Police station located at the Elig-Essono
neighbourhood in Yaoundé on charges of
“insurrection and rebellion against the State”,
for peacefully protesting against the
government. On 20 May, she was detained
along with 14 members of her party at the
Directorate for the Surveillance of the
National Territory in Yaoundé charged with
“rebellion, inciting insurrection and inciting
revolt”; they were all released the same day
without any explanation. On 28 October
Kah Walla was arrested at her party
headquarters in Yaoundé and detained at the
Yaoundé 1 Central Police Station alongside
50 of her supporters as they gathered for a
prayer for the victims of the Eseka train
crash. The arrest was carried out without any
warrant. They were detained for more than
seven hours without charge. No reason was
given for their arrest.
In late October, lawyers, students and
teachers from the Anglophone regions of
Cameroon went on strike, in opposition to
what they viewed as the marginalization of
the Anglophone minority. Protesting erupted
in several cities in the southwest and
northwest of the country, including Bamenda,
Kumba and Buea. Cameroon’s security
forces arbitrarily arrested protesters and used
excessive force to disperse them. In one
example, on 8 December, the use of live
bullets by security forces led to the deaths of
between two and four people during a protest
in the northwestern city of Bamenda.
UNFAIR TRIALS
People continued to face unfair trials before
military courts.
The trial of Radio France Internationale
correspondent Ahmed Abba, who was
arrested in Maroua in July 2015, began at
Yaoundé Military Court on 29 February. It was
marred by irregularities, including witnesses
not being called to testify, and documents not
being shared with defence lawyers. Charged
with complicity with and non-denunciation of
107terrorist acts, he was tortured while held
incommunicado for three months.
The trial of three journalists – Rodrigue
Tongué, Felix Ebole Bola and Baba Wamé –
continued at Yaoundé Military Court. They
were charged in October 2014 with non-
denunciation of information and sources. If
convicted, they could face up to five years’
imprisonment. Trial proceedings were marred
by substantive and procedural irregularities,
including the refusal by the judges to allow
witnesses to testify. Aboubakar Siddiki, leader
of the political party Mouvement patriotique
du salut camerounais, and Abdoulaye
Harissou, a well-known notary, faced trial
alongside the three journalists. Arrested in
August 2014, they were both held
incommunicado at the DGRE for more than
40 days before being transferred to Prison
Principale in Yaoundé. They faced charges of
illegal possession and use of weapons of war,
murder, revolution, insulting the head of state
and hostility against the state.
Fomusoh Ivo Feh, arrested in December
2014 in Limbe for forwarding a sarcastic text
message about Boko Haram, was sentenced
to 10 years in prison by Yaoundé Military
Court on 2 November for “non-denunciation
of a terrorist act”. Convicted on the basis of
limited and unverifiable evidence, his trial
was marred by irregularities, including the
lack of an interpreter.
IMPUNITY
On 11 July, the State Secretary to the
Minister of Defence in charge of the national
gendarmerie said that a commission of
inquiry to investigate crimes committed by
the security forces engaged in operations
against Boko Haram would be set up. No
further information was provided.
In August, the trial of gendarmerie Colonel
Zé Onguéné Charles, charged with
negligence and breach of custody law,
started before Yaoundé Military Court. The
Colonel was in charge of the region where, on
27-28 December 2014, at least 25 men
accused of supporting Boko Haram died
while detained in a gendarmerie building.
108
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prison conditions remained poor, marked by
chronic overcrowding, inadequate food,
limited medical care, and deplorable hygiene
and sanitation. Maroua prison housed around
1,400 detainees, more than three times its
intended capacity. The population of the
central prison in Yaoundé was approximately
4,000, despite a maximum capacity of 2,000.
In Prison Principale in Yaoundé, the majority
of suspected Boko Haram detainees were
permanently chained until August.
The main factors contributing to
overcrowding included the mass arrests of
people accused of supporting Boko Haram,
the large number of detainees held without
charge, and the ineffective judicial system.
The government promised to build new
prisons and began constructing 12 new cells
for the prison in Maroua. The measures were
considered insufficient to resolve the crisis.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
At least 276,000 refugees from the Central
African Republic lived in harsh conditions in
crowded camps or with host families along
border areas of southeastern Cameroon.
Some 59,000 refugees from Nigeria lived in
the UN-run Minawao camp in the Far North
region, but around 27,000 others struggled to
cope outside the camp, facing food
insecurity, lack of access to basic services
and harassment by the security forces. The
insecurity created by both Boko Haram and
the military also led to the internal
displacement of around 199,000 people in
the Far North region. Agreements between
Cameroon, Nigeria, Central African Republic
and UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, to
facilitate voluntary return of refugees were
being finalized at the end of the year.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination, intimidation, harassment and
violence. The criminalization of same-sex
sexual relations was retained when the
Criminal Code was revised in June.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17On 2 August, three young men were
arrested in Yaoundé and taken to a
gendarmerie station where they were beaten,
insulted and had their hair partially shaved
off. The gendarmes poured cold water on the
men, forced them to clean the gendarmerie
building, and demanded they “confess” their
sexuality. They were released 24 hours later
on payment of a bribe.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
The Boko Haram violence exacerbated the
hardships of communities in the Far North
region, limiting their access to basic social
services, and disrupting trade, farming and
pastoralism. Some 1.4 million people in the
region, most of them children, faced crisis or
emergency levels of food insecurity, and 144
schools and 21 health centres were forced to
shut down due to insecurity.
An amended version of the Penal Code,
passed in July, provided that tenants owing
more than two months’ rent could be
sentenced to up to three years in prison.
About a third of households lived in rented
accommodation and almost half of the
country’s population lived below the poverty
line.
DEATH PENALTY
People accused of supporting Boko Haram
continued to be sentenced to death following
unfair trials in military courts; none were
executed during the year. The vast majority of
cases were prosecuted under a deeply flawed
anti-terrorism law passed in December 2014.
1. Right cause, wrong means: Human rights violated and justice denied
in Cameroon’s fight against Boko Haram (AFR 17/4260/2016)
CANADA
Canada
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by
Governor General David Johnston
Head of government: Justin Trudeau
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Some 38,000 Syrian refugees were
resettled. A national inquiry into violence
against Indigenous women and girls was
launched. Concerns persisted about the
failure to uphold the rights of Indigenous
Peoples in the face of economic
development projects.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In January, the Canadian Human Rights
Tribunal ruled that systemic underfunding of
First Nation child protection services
constituted discrimination. The government
accepted the ruling but failed to bring an end
to the discrimination.
In May, the government announced
unconditional support for the UN Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; by the
end of the year it remained unclear how it
would collaborate with Indigenous Peoples to
implement that commitment.
In May, a provincially funded report
confirmed that mercury contamination
continued for the Grassy Narrows First Nation
in the Province of Ontario.
In July, the government issued permits
allowing construction of the Site C dam in the
Province of British Columbia to proceed,
despite unresolved court cases concerning
obligations under a historic treaty with
affected First Nations.
In October, the government of the Province
of Newfoundland and Labrador agreed to
measures to reduce risks to Inuit health and
culture from the Muskrat Falls dam, following
hunger strikes and other protests.
In November, the British Columbia
government acknowledged the need to
address the impact of the resource sector on
the safety of Indigenous women and girls.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In March, the government committed to
promoting the sexual and reproductive health
and rights of women and girls through its
international development programme.
In September, the National Inquiry into
Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women
and Girls was launched. Its mandate did not
explicitly include police actions or measures
109to address past failures to properly investigate
cases. In November, the UN CEDAW
Committee called on Canada to ensure that
the National Inquiry would investigate the role
of policing.
In November, prosecutors in the Province
of Quebec laid charges in only two of 37
complaints brought mostly by Indigenous
women alleging abuse by police. The
Independent Observer appointed to oversee
the cases raised concerns about systemic
racism. In December the Quebec
government announced a public inquiry into
the treatment of Indigenous Peoples by
provincial bodies.
In November, the Quebec government
launched a public inquiry into surveillance of
journalists by police.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Throughout the year, 38,700 Syrian refugees
were resettled to Canada through government
and private sponsorship.
In April, the Interim Federal Health
Program for refugees and refugee claimants
was fully restored, reversing cuts imposed
in 2012.
In August, the Minister of Public Safety
announced increased funding for
immigration detention facilities.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In February, legislation was introduced to
reverse 2014 Citizenship Act reforms allowing
for dual nationals convicted of terrorism and
other offences to be stripped of Canadian
citizenship.
In February, the government withdrew an
appeal against the 2015 bail decision
releasing Omar Khadr – a Canadian citizen
held at the US detention centre in
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, for 10 years
beginning when he was 15 years old and
transferred to a Canadian prison in 2012.
In November, the Federal Court ruled that
the Canadian Security and Intelligence
Service practice of indefinitely retaining
metadata from phone and email logs
was unlawful.
Mediation broke off in the cases of
Abdullah Almalki, Ahmad Abou-Elmaati and
Muayyed Nureddin who were seeking redress
on the basis of a 2008 judicial inquiry report
documenting the role of Canadian officials
in their overseas arrest, imprisonment
and torture. In June, the British Columbia government
allowed full operations to resume at the
Mount Polley mine, despite an ongoing
criminal investigation into the 2014 collapse
of the mine’s tailings pond and the fact that
approval of the company’s long-term water
treatment plan was pending. In November, a
private prosecution was launched against the
provincial government and the Mount Polley
Mining Corporation for violations of the
Fisheries Act.
In May, the fifth annual report assessing
the human rights impact of the Canada-
Colombia Free Trade Agreement was
released. It again failed to evaluate human
rights concerns linked to extractive projects’
effects on Indigenous Peoples and others.
The government failed to adopt measures
to fulfil a 2015 election promise to establish a
human rights Ombudsperson for the
extractive sector. Canada was urged to take
that step by the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) in March
and by the CEDAW Committee in November.
Three Canadian companies faced civil
lawsuits over alleged human rights abuses
associated with overseas projects. A case
dealing with HudBay Minerals’ Guatemalan
mine was proceeding in Ontario. In October,
a British Columbia court ruled that a case
involving Nevsun Resources’ Eritrean mine
could proceed. In November, an appeal was
heard in British Columbia as to whether a
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Concerns mounted about extensive use of
solitary confinement after the case of Adam
Capay, an Indigenous man held in pre-trial
solitary confinement in Ontario for over four
years, became public in October.
110
Amnesty International Report 2016/17case involving Tahoe Resources’ Guatemalan
mine could go ahead.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In February, a 2007 policy limiting
government efforts to seek clemency on
behalf of Canadians sentenced to death in
foreign countries was reversed.
In March, the UN CESCR called on
Canada to recognize that economic, social
and cultural rights are fully justiciable.
In April, the government approved a
Can$15 billion sale of light armoured vehicles
to Saudi Arabia despite human rights
concerns. A 2015 commitment to accede to
the UN Arms Trade Treaty was not met.
In May, the government announced plans
to accede to the Optional Protocol to the UN
Convention against Torture and launched
consultations with provincial and territorial
governments.
Also in May, the government introduced
legislation to add gender identity and
expression as a prohibited ground of
discrimination in Canada’s Human Rights Act
and Criminal Code hate crime laws.
CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Central African Republic
Head of state: Faustin-Archange Touadéra (replaced
Catherine Samba-Panza in March)
Head of government: Simplice Sarandji (replaced
Mahamat Kamoun in April)
Conflict between and within armed groups
and militias, as well as between
international peacekeepers and these
groups, continued and involved serious
human rights abuses, including crimes
under international law. Impunity persisted
for those suspected of abuses and crimes
under international law. More than 434,000
people were internally displaced and living
in harsh conditions, and at least 2.3 million
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
people depended on humanitarian
assistance. Allegations of sexual abuse by
international peacekeepers continued to be
reported.
BACKGROUND
From June onwards, after a period of relative
calm, conflict between armed groups and
attacks on civilians increased. The conflict,
which began in 2013 with the ousting of
President François Bozizé, claimed
thousands of lives. Armed groups,
particularly ex-Seleka and Anti-balaka forces,
continued to control large swathes of the
country, facilitated by mass circulation of
small arms.
Elections were held to replace the
transitional government and on 11 April a
new government was formed.
Some 12,870 uniformed personnel were
deployed as part of the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), whose
mandate was renewed until 15 November
2017. Following criticism of MINUSCA’s
capacity to respond to attacks, its forces were
strengthened. 1 However, it continued to have
limited ability to protect civilians, given the
vast size of the Central African Republic
(CAR) and the significant presence of armed
groups and militias. French forces, deployed
under Operation Sangaris, were almost
completely withdrawn in October.
In October, the CAR acceded without
reservation to the UN
Convention against Torture and its Optional
Protocol; the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance; the Optional Protocol
to CEDAW; and the Optional Protocol to the
ICESCR. However, the CAR authorities did
not recognize the competence of the relevant
treaty bodies.
A major CAR donors’ conference was held
in Brussels on 17 November. The CAR
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan
2017-2021 was presented to donors and
requested $105 million over five years to
support measures to both strengthen the
111domestic justice system and operationalize
the Special Criminal Court (SCC).
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS AND
CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
Armed groups and militias committed human
rights abuses, including unlawful killings,
torture and other ill-treatment, abductions,
sexual assaults, looting and destruction of
property, and attacks on humanitarian
workers and premises. Some of these
amounted to crimes under international law.
According to the UN, more than 300 security
incidents targeting relief agencies were
reported and at least five humanitarian
workers were killed. More than 500 civilians
were also killed in the violence according to
international NGOs.
The risk of attack by Anti-balaka forces
and their affiliates continued to restrict
freedom of movement for Muslims living in
enclaves across the country.
On 3 September, two civilians were killed
as ex-Seleka fighters clashed with the local
population and Anti-balaka forces near
Dekoa town, Kemo district. The ex-Seleka
fighters had escaped MINUSCA three weeks
earlier after the peacekeeping force arrested
11 ex-Seleka members who were part of a
convoy of prominent armed leaders,
including Abdoulaye Hissène and Haroun
Gaye, who also escaped.
On 10 September, 19 civilians were killed
during fighting between Anti-balaka and ex-
Seleka forces near the southern town of
Kouango, Ouaka district. An estimated
3,500 people were displaced and 13 villages
burned.
On 16 September, ex-Seleka fighters killed
six civilians in the village of Ndomete, near
the northern town of Kaga-Bandoro, Nana-
Grébizi district, as a result of tensions
between the group and Anti-balaka militia.
Between 4 and 8 October, at least 11
civilians were killed and 14 injured in the
capital, Bangui, in reprisal attacks triggered
by the assassination of a former army colonel
by members of a militia based in the Muslim
enclave of the capital known as PK5.
112
On 12 October, at least 37 civilians were
killed, 60 injured and over 20,000 displaced
when ex-Seleka fighters attacked and burned
a camp for internally displaced people in
Kaga-Bandoro in reprisal for the killing of an
ex-Seleka member.
On 15 October in Ngakobo, Ouaka district,
suspected ex-Seleka fighters attacked a
camp for displaced people, leaving 11
civilians dead.
On 24 October in Bangui, a protest against
MINUSCA led by civilians infiltrated by armed
elements left four civilians dead and nine
wounded.
On 27 October, 15 people were killed in
clashes between ex-Seleka and Anti-balaka
in the villages of Mbriki and Belima, near
Bambari, Ouaka district.
In late November fighting between rival ex-
Seleka factions in Bria left at least 14 civilians
dead and 75 wounded.
The southeast of the CAR was also
affected by violence, including by the armed
group Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
International NGOs reported 103 attacks by
the LRA leading to at least 18 civilian
casualties and 497 kidnappings since the
beginning of the year.
VIOLATIONS BY PEACEKEEPING FORCES
Civilians continued to report sexual abuse by
international forces. Following the report of
an independent panel in December 2015,
and a visit in April by the Special Coordinator
on improving the United Nations’ response to
sexual exploitation and abuse, MINUSCA
introduced measures to strengthen
monitoring, reporting and accountability in
relation to such cases.
Countries contributing peacekeeping
troops to the CAR whose soldiers were
accused of sexual abuse took some steps to
ensure accountability, but prosecutions
remained rare. In April, three Congolese
peacekeepers accused of sexual abuse in the
CAR appeared before a military court in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).
Amnesty International Report 2016/17REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
More than 434,000 people remained
internally displaced. They lived in harsh
conditions in makeshift camps, and lacked
access to food, water, basic health services
and adequate sanitation. The spontaneous
return of a small number of internally
displaced people caused intercommunal
tensions in some areas, especially in the
southwest. The returns significantly
decreased following the renewed violence
from June onward.
IMPUNITY
Members of armed groups, militias and
security forces suspected of human rights
abuses and crimes under international law
did not face effective investigations or trial.
Some suspects appeared to be linked to
ongoing armed violence, human rights
abuses and crimes under international law,
and a few held positions of authority. Among
them were prominent ex-Seleka leader
Haroun Gaye, the subject of an international
arrest warrant and UN sanctions, who had
admitted orchestrating the kidnapping of six
policemen in Bangui on 16 June; and Alfred
Yekatom (“Colonel Rambo”), a feared Anti-
balaka commander also on the UN sanctions
list, who began sitting as an elected member
of CAR’s National Assembly in early 2016.
MINUSCA arrested 194 individuals under
its Urgent Temporary Measures, including
prominent ex-Seleka leader Hahmed Tidjani
on 13 August.
A weak national justice system
undermined efforts to ensure accountability.
The presence and functioning of judicial
institutions remained limited, especially
outside Bangui. In areas controlled by armed
groups, such as Ndélé town, the capital of
Bamingui-Bangoran, armed groups and/or
traditional chiefs administered justice.
Judicial authorities lacked the capacity to
investigate and prosecute people suspected
of crimes, including serious human rights
abuses. In the few cases involving human
rights abuses that went to court, defendants
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
were acquitted or convicted of minor offences
and immediately released for time spent in
prison, and fear of reprisals prevented
witnesses and victims testifying.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
Limited progress was made in
operationalizing the Special Criminal Court,
which would bring together national and
international judges to try individuals
suspected of serious human rights violations
and crimes under international law
committed since 2003.
The International Criminal Court (ICC)
investigations on the CAR II situation, based
on crimes under international law committed
from 2012 onward, continued. Two separate
teams worked respectively on crimes
committed by ex-Seleka and by Anti-balaka
and its affiliates. On 20 June, ICC
investigations on the CAR I situation, which
focused on crimes against humanity and war
crimes since 1 July 2002, resulted in the
conviction of a Congolese national, Jean-
Pierre Bemba Gombo, as a military
commander. He was sentenced to 18 years
in prison for war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including murder, rape and
pillaging committed by his militia.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prison conditions remained poor and
security was weak. Of 38 official detention
facilities across the country, only eight
were functional.
In September, guards severely beat 21
inmates in Ngaragba prison in Bangui. This
triggered an attempted prison break, which
was foiled by guards using tear gas. An
investigation into the events was opened soon
afterwards by national authorities.
NATURAL RESOURCES
The Kimberley Process, a global initiative to
stop “blood diamonds” from being sold
internationally, banned the CAR from
exporting diamonds in May 2013. However,
the CAR diamond trade continued and
armed groups involved in abuses profited
from it. In July 2015, the Kimberley Process
113allowed the resumption of diamond exports
from “compliant zones”. During 2016,
Berberati, Boda, Carnot and Nola, all in the
southwest, were deemed to be “compliant
zones”.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
According to the UN, 2.3 million of the
population of 4.8 million needed
humanitarian assistance and 2.5 million
people remained food insecure. As a result of
the conflict, household incomes fell and food
prices rose. Basic health services and
medicines were provided almost entirely by
humanitarian organizations following the
collapse of the health system. Less than half
of the population had access to effective
health care, and virtually no psychosocial
support was available. According to the UN,
only about a third of the population had
access to safe drinking water and adequate
sanitation facilities.
1. Mandated to protect, equipped to succeed? Strengthening
peacekeeping in Central African Republic (AFR 19/3263/2016)
CHAD
Republic of Chad
Head of state: Idriss Déby Itno
Head of government: Albert Pahimi Padacké (replaced
Kalzeubet Pahimi Deubet in February)
The armed group Boko Haram continued to
commit abuses around Lake Chad, killing
people and looting and destroying property.
The violence and the government’s response
displaced tens of thousands of people, who
then faced dire living conditions, including
little access to water and sanitation.
Presidential elections in April took place
against a backdrop of restrictions on
freedom of expression, excessive or
unnecessary use of force against peaceful
demonstrators, and enforced
disappearances. More than 389,000
refugees continued to live in harsh
114
conditions in crowded camps. Former
President Hissène Habré was sentenced to
life imprisonment by the Extraordinary
African Chambers (EAC) in Senegal for
crimes against humanity, war crimes and
torture committed in Chad between 1982
and 1990.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Boko Haram carried out attacks on civilians
and security forces, killing people and looting
and destroying private property and
public facilities.
On 31 January, at least three people,
including a member of a vigilante group,
were killed in two suicide attacks by Boko
Haram in the villages of Guié and Miterine,
Lake Chad region, and more than 56 people
were injured.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression and of
association were violated. Human rights
defenders continued to be threatened and
intimidated, and access to social media was
regularly restricted. On 19 March, the
government banned all demonstrations that
were not part of the election campaign.
On 6 February, 17 peaceful protesters
were arrested in the capital, N’Djamena.
They were held for two days at the judicial
police headquarters, where they were beaten
and had tear gas thrown into their cell. At
least two of them needed intensive care
treatment in hospital.
Between 21 and 23 March, four activists
were arrested and charged with “disturbing
public order” and “disobeying a lawful order”
for planning to organize a peaceful
demonstration. They were detained in
Amsinene Prison in N’Djamena from 24
March to 14 April. On 14 April they received
a four-month suspended sentence and were
prohibited from “engaging in subversive
activities”. On 4 April, activist Dr Albissaty
Salhe Alazam was charged with “incitement
to take part in an unarmed gathering”,
“disturbing public order” and “disobeying a
lawful order” for organizing a peaceful
Amnesty International Report 2016/17demonstration on 5 April to demand the
release of the four activists. He received a
four-month suspended prison sentence.
In mid-April, two human rights activists
fled the country after receiving death threats
via SMS and anonymous phone calls
following their involvement in pre-election
protests against the re-election of
President Déby.
On 17 November, 11 opposition activists
were arrested during an unauthorized protest
against the economic crisis and charged with
taking part in an “unarmed gathering”. They
were released on 7 December and the
charges were dropped.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Security forces used excessive or
unnecessary force with impunity to
disperse demonstrations in N’Djamena and
other towns.
In February and March, security forces
violently dispersed several peaceful
demonstrations across the country
demanding justice for Zouhoura Ibrahim, a
16-year-old student raped on 8 February,
allegedly by five young men with links to the
authorities and security forces. On 15
February, police killed a 17-year-old student
during a peaceful demonstration in
N’Djamena, and on 22 February security
forces shot dead a 15-year-old student and
injured at least five others in the city of
Faya Largeau.
On 7 August, police used firearms to
disperse a peaceful demonstration in
N’Djamena against President Idriss Déby’s
re-election, killing one young man and
seriously injuring another.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
– JOURNALISTS
Journalists continued to be intimidated and
routinely subjected to arbitrary arrests and
short-term detention for exercising their right
to freedom of expression.
On 28 May, a presenter on a national radio
station was interrogated by agents of the
Directorate of General Information after
accidentally referring to the President as
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Hissène Habré instead of Idriss Déby while
on air. He was released seven hours later and
suspended from the show.
On 30 August, Stéphane Mbaïrabé Ouaye,
Director of Publication of Haut Parleur
newspaper, was arrested, questioned by
agents of the Directorate of General
Information and charged with “attempted
fraud and blackmail” following an interview
with the Director of the Mother and Child
Hospital in N’Djamena about allegations of
corruption. He was tried and acquitted, and
released on 22 September.
On 9 September, Bemadjiel Saturnin, a
reporter at Radio FM Liberté, was arrested
while covering a protest, despite having his
professional ID. He was questioned at the
central police station and released four hours
later.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 9 April, at least 64 soldiers were victims of
enforced disappearance after refusing to vote
for the incumbent President. Witnesses
described how security forces identified
soldiers who supported opposition
candidates, ill-treated them at polling
stations, abducted them, and tortured them
at both recognized and unrecognized
detention centres. Forty-nine of the soldiers
were released, but the fate of the other 15
was still unclarified at the end of 2016.
Following international pressure, the Public
Prosecutor opened an investigation into the
case of five of the soldiers, but the case was
closed after their release. No investigation
was undertaken into the allegations of torture
and the other cases of disappearance.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
More than 389,000 refugees from the
Central African Republic, Nigeria and Sudan
continued to live in poor conditions in
refugee camps.
As a result of attacks and threats by Boko
Haram, and security operations by the
Chadian military, 105,000 people were
internally displaced and 12,000 returned
from Nigeria and Niger to the Lake Chad
115Basin. The deteriorating security situation in
the border areas of the Lake Chad region
from late July onward affected humanitarian
access and the protection of vulnerable
populations. Internally displaced people in
the Lake Chad Basin lived in dire conditions
with extremely limited access to water and
sanitation, especially in the Baga-Sola sites of
Bol, Liwa and Ngouboua.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD OF
LIVING, EDUCATION AND JUSTICE
People continued to flee the escalating
violence in the Lake Chad area, disrupting
agriculture, trade and fishing with dire
economic and social consequences. The
volatile security situation exacerbated food
insecurity. In September, the UN estimated
that 3.8 million people were food insecure,
including 1 million people at crisis or
emergency level.
Delays in salary payments led to regular
public sector strikes, restricting access to
education and justice.
In August, the government adopted 16
emergency reform measures to tackle the
economic crisis linked to the drop in the
price of oil, including cancelling scholarships
for university students in the countryside. In
response, students organized both peaceful
and violent demonstrations in the main cities,
including N’Djamena, Sarh, Pala and Bongor.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Despite national law providing for the right of
couples and individuals to decide freely the
number, spacing and timing of their children,
to manage their reproductive health, and to
have access to the information and means to
do so, many people had no access to
reproductive information or care, particularly
in rural areas. The UN Population Fund
(UNFPA) estimated that only 3% of women
used any form of contraception. According to
2014 figures from the National Institute of
Statistics, only 5% of married women used
modern contraceptive methods.
In December the National Assembly
adopted a reform of the penal code raising
116
the legal age of marriage for girls from 16 to
18 years.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
On 30 May, former President Habré was
sentenced to life imprisonment by the EAC in
Senegal, a court established under an
agreement between the African Union and
Senegal. He was found guilty of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and torture
committed in Chad between 1982 and 1990.
His lawyers lodged an appeal.
On 29 July, the EAC awarded the victims
of rape and sexual violence in the case 20
million CFA (US$33,880) each; the victims of
arbitrary detention and torture, as well as
prisoners of war and survivors, 15 million
CFA (US$25,410) each; and the indirect
victims, 10 million CFA (US$16,935) each.
CHILE
Republic of Chile
Head of state and government: Michelle Bachelet Jeria
Impunity for past and continuing human
rights violations remained a concern. Legal
proceedings relating to allegations of past
crimes under international law and other
human rights violations continued; in a few
cases, those involved were imprisoned. For
much of the year, cases of unnecessary and
excessive use of force by the police
continued to be dealt with by the military
courts. However, a law passed in November
excludes civilians from military jurisdiction.
Abortion remained criminalized in all
circumstances, although some steps were
taken to decriminalize it in limited
circumstances.
BACKGROUND
Between April and August, the government
carried out a consultation process open to all
citizens as the first step towards the adoption
of a new Constitution. The current
Constitution, adopted during the military
government under General Pinochet,
Amnesty International Report 2016/17contains several provisions that are not in line
with international human rights law.
In January, a law entered into force
establishing a new Undersecretariat on
Human Rights under the Ministry of Justice.
The first Undersecretary was appointed
in September.
In April, the government announced that
plans to reform the law on migration were
postponed indefinitely. In December it was
announced that the bill would be filed in
January 2017.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Allegations of unnecessary or excessive use
of force by the police, especially in the
context of public protests, continued to be
reported. Children, women, journalists and
employees of the National Human Rights
Institute acting as observers were among
the victims.
Human rights violations involving members
of the security forces continued to be dealt
with by military courts. However, a new law
entered into force in November that expressly
stated that civilians, whether accused or the
victims of crime, were excluded from
military jurisdiction.
In January, the National Human Rights
Institute filed a lawsuit to push for further
investigation by the ordinary courts into the
enforced disappearance of 16-year-old José
Huenante; he was last seen being detained
by policemen in September 2005. Following
the lawsuit, a military court also reopened an
investigation. However, at the end of the year,
José Huenante’s fate and whereabouts
remained unclarified and neither
investigation had established the facts of the
case or identified those responsible.
IMPUNITY
During the year, several convictions for past
crimes under international law and other
human rights violations committed during the
military regime were confirmed. In
September, the Supreme Court confirmed the
four-year sentences of two former military
officials for the torture of General Alberto
Bachelet in 1973.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Victims, their relatives and civil society
organizations opposed several attempts to
obtain the early release on parole of people
convicted of human rights violations during
the military government under Augusto
Pinochet. At the end of the year, a bill was
before Congress to deny the possibility of
parole for those convicted of crimes
against humanity.
A law establishing the crime of torture in
Chilean law came into force in November. In
September, Chile was one of the countries
listed by the UN Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture as having delayed
complying with the Optional Protocol to the
UN Convention against Torture, because of
the absence of a national mechanism for the
prevention of torture.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In January, Congress established a
commission to investigate violence in
Araucanía, the region most affected by land
conflicts involving the Mapuche. The
commission focused on crimes allegedly
committed by the Mapuche as a form of
protest. However, continued allegations of
excessive use of force and arbitrary
detentions during police operations against
Mapuche communities were not investigated
as they did not fall within the commission’s
mandate. The Chamber of Deputies
approved the commission’s conclusions
in September.
In May, the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights extended the precautionary
measures ordered in October 2015 in favour
of Mapuche leader Juana Calfunao. These
measures sought to protect additional
members of her family living in the
community of Juan Paillalef in the south of
Chile from threats to their life and integrity
related to a land dispute.
In August, photographer Felipe Durán and
Mapuche community member Cristián
Levinao were found not guilty of all charges.
The two men had been accused of illegal
possession of weapons and drug
offences and held in preventive detention for
over 300 days.
117The Machi (Mapuche traditional spiritual
authority) Francisca Linconao was detained
in March and held pending trial. On four
occasions a judge allowed her transfer to
house arrest to address serious health
concerns. On each occasion this was
overturned on appeal and she was returned
to prison shortly afterwards. In November she
was transferred to hospital. In December she
began a hunger strike, demanding to be held
in her own home pre-trial, and her defence
team filed a writ of amparo calling for the
same measure. She remained on hunger
strike at the end of the year.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Abortion remained a criminal offence in all
circumstances. Several women seeking
medical care for complications following
unsafe abortions risked criminal charges after
being reported to the authorities by health
professionals.
In March, the Chamber of Deputies
approved a bill decriminalizing abortion when
the pregnancy poses a risk to a woman’s life,
when it is the result of rape and in cases of
serious foetal impairment. However,
provisions prohibiting health professionals
from reporting women were removed from
the bill following their rejection by the
Chamber of Deputies. The amended bill was
pending before the Senate by the end of the
year.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In September, the Senate Human Rights
Commission approved the Gender Identity
Bill, the first step towards its approval after
three years of debate. Approval by the Senate
and the Chamber of Deputies remained
pending at the end of the year. The Bill
proposed establishing the right of individuals
over 18 to have their gender identity legally
recognized by changing their name and
gender on official documents through an
administrative process and without the
existing requirements of gender reassignment
surgery or medical certification.
118
In July, Chile reached a friendly settlement
before the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights on a complaint on behalf of
three gay couples who were denied the right
to marry. The settlement included the
adoption of a series of measures and policies
to promote the rights of LGBTI people. In
August, as part of the settlement, the
government announced a participatory
process with civil society aimed at drafting a
bill to establish marriage equality.
CHINA
People’s Republic of China
Head of state: Xi Jinping
Head of government: Li Keqiang
The government continued to draft and
enact a series of new national security laws
that presented serious threats to the
protection of human rights. The nationwide
crackdown on human rights lawyers and
activists continued throughout the year.
Activists and human rights defenders
continued to be systematically subjected to
monitoring, harassment, intimidation, arrest
and detention. Police detained increasing
numbers of human rights defenders outside
of formal detention facilities, sometimes
without access to a lawyer for long periods,
exposing the detainees to the risk of torture
and other ill-treatment. Booksellers,
publishers, activists and a journalist who
went missing in neighbouring countries in
2015 and 2016 turned up in detention in
China, causing concerns about China’s law
enforcement agencies acting outside their
jurisdiction. Controls on the internet, mass
media and academia were significantly
strengthened. Repression of religious
activities outside of direct state control
increased. Religious repression conducted
under “anti-separatism” or “counter-
terrorism” campaigns remained particularly
severe in Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous
Region and in Tibetan-populated areas.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
Sweeping national security laws and
regulations continued to be drafted and
enacted, giving greater powers to the
authorities to silence dissent, restrict or
censor information and harass and prosecute
human rights defenders.
The Foreign NGO Management Law was
due to come into force on 1 January 2017,
creating additional barriers to the already
limited rights to freedom of association,
peaceful assembly and expression. Although
the law was ostensibly designed to regulate
and even protect the activities of foreign
NGOs, it transferred to the Ministry of Public
Security – the state policing agency – the
responsibility to oversee the registration of
these NGOs, as well as supervise their
operations and pre-approve their activities.
The wide discretion given to police to oversee
and manage the work of foreign NGOs raised
the risk of the law being misused to
intimidate and prosecute human rights
defenders and NGO staff.
On 7 November, the National People’s
Congress (NPC) passed the Cyber Security
Law, which purported to protect internet
users’ personal data from hacking and theft,
but made it obligatory for internet companies
operating in China to censor content, store
users’ data domestically, and enforce a real-
name registration system in a way that runs
counter to national and international
obligations to safeguard the rights to freedom
of expression and privacy. The law prohibited
individuals or groups from using the internet
to “harm national security”, “upset social
order”, or “harm national interests” – terms
that were vague and imprecise under existing
Chinese law and could be used to further
restrict freedom of expression. The law
enshrined the concept of “internet
sovereignty”, which justified broad
censorship and extensive surveillance powers
in the name of protecting national security.
Also on 7 November, the NPC passed the
Film Industry Promotion Law which
prohibited the production of films that
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
include content endangering national
security, inciting ethnic hatred and violating
religious policies.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Shortcomings in domestic law and systemic
problems in the criminal justice system
resulted in widespread torture and other ill-
treatment and unfair trials.
The authorities increasingly used
“residential surveillance in a designated
location”, a form of secret incommunicado
detention that allowed the police to hold
individuals for up to six months outside the
formal detention system, without access to
legal counsel of their choice, their families or
anybody else from the outside world, and
placed suspects at risk of torture and other
ill-treatment. This form of detention was used
to curb the activities of human rights
defenders, including lawyers, activists and
religious practitioners.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
At the end of the year, five people remained
in detention awaiting trial on charges of
“subverting state power” or “inciting
subversion of state power”, and four on
charges of “picking quarrels and provoking
trouble” or “making arrangements for
another person to illegally cross the national
border”. Their detention followed the
unprecedented government crackdown on
human rights lawyers and other activists
which started in mid-2015, in which at least
248 lawyers and activists were questioned or
detained by state security agents. At least 12
of the individuals detained in the crackdown,
including prominent human rights lawyers
Zhou Shifeng, Sui Muqing, Li Heping and
Wang Quanzhang, had been held in
“residential surveillance in a designated
location” on suspicion of involvement in state
security crimes. Family members of those
detained were also subject to police
surveillance, harassment and restriction of
their freedom of movement. Legal assistant
Zhao Wei and lawyer Wang Yu were released
on bail in early July and early August
respectively, although they remained subject
119to restrictions on their rights to freedom of
movement, expression and association for
one year and remained at risk of prosecution.
On 2 August, activist Zhai Yanmin was
convicted of “subverting state power” and
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment,
suspended for four years. Hu Shigen and
lawyer Zhou Shifeng were convicted of the
same charge and sentenced to seven and a
half years’ imprisonment and seven
years’ imprisonment respectively on
3 and 4 August.
Lawyer Jiang Tianyong went missing on 21
November. His family was notified on 23
December that he had been placed under
“residential surveillance in a designated
location” under suspicion of “inciting
subversion of state power”. Liu Feiyue and
Huang Qi, both human rights defenders and
website founders, were detained in
November, accused respectively of “inciting
subversion” and “leaking state secrets”.
The authorities in Guangdong province,
where labour disputes and strikes were on
the rise, continued their crackdown on
workers and labour rights activists which
began in December 2015. At least 33
individuals were targeted; 31 were later
released. Labour activist Zeng Feiyang was
denied access to lawyers and sentenced to
three years’ imprisonment, suspended for
four years, in early October. Labour activist
Meng Han was sentenced to one year and
nine months’ imprisonment on 3 November.
In many cases the detention centres initially
denied access to lawyers on the grounds
that the cases involved “endangering
national security”.
Six of the more than 100 people in
mainland China detained for supporting the
Hong Kong pro-democracy protests in late
2014 were sentenced to prison terms. They
included Xie Wenfei and Wang Mo, leaders of
the Southern Street Movement, who were
sentenced to four and a half years’
imprisonment on charges of “inciting
subversion”. Two others, women’s rights
activist Su Changlan and Chen Qitang,
remained in detention with no dates set for
their trials. Zhang Shengyu, who was among
120
those detained for supporting the Hong Kong
protests, reported that he was beaten and Su
Changlan reported she was denied adequate
medical treatment in detention.
The number of carefully choreographed
televised “confessions” increased during the
year. They included interviews with detained
human rights defenders conducted by
Chinese state media and, in two cases, by
pro-Beijing media outlets in Hong Kong.
Although such “confessions” had no legal
validity, they undermined the right to a fair
trial. Those shown “confessing” on television
included lawyers Zhou Shifeng and Wang Yu,
activist Zhai Yanmin, Hong Kong bookseller
Gui Minhai and Swedish NGO worker Peter
Dahlin, who was detained and later deported.
Zhao Wei and her lawyer, Ren Quanniu,
posted confessions on their social media after
they were reportedly released on bail.
Several journalists and activists who went
missing outside mainland China were
detained or feared to be detained in China.
Journalist Li Xin, who revealed in media
interviews that Chinese state security officials
had put him under intense pressure to act as
an informant against his colleagues and
friends before he fled China in 2015, went
missing in Thailand in January 2016. He
telephoned his partner in February and said
he had voluntarily returned to China to assist
with an investigation. He was not heard from
again and his whereabouts were undisclosed
at the end of the year. Tang Zhishun and Xing
Qingxian went missing in Myanmar in 2015
while helping the son of two detained
Chinese lawyers. Without providing any
explanation for the time lag, the authorities
charged them with “making arrangements for
another person to illegally cross the national
border” in notices dated May 2016.
In May, pro-democracy activists Jiang Yefei
and Dong Guangping were confirmed to have
been detained on suspicion of “subverting
state power” and “making arrangements for
another person to illegally cross the national
border”. They had been granted refugee
status by UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
but were repatriated from Thailand to China
in 2015. Neither had access to family or
Amnesty International Report 2016/17lawyers of their choice for at least the first six
months after their return and Dong
Guangping still had no access by the end of
the year.
Miao Deshun, a labour activist arrested
after participating in the pro-democracy
Tiananmen Square protests in 1989, was
reportedly released in October after 27 years’
imprisonment. Activists who commemorated
the Tiananmen crackdown continued to be
detained, including Sichuan activists Fu
Hailu and Luo Fuyu. 1
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In March, police reportedly detained at least
20 people in connection with the publication
of an open letter criticizing President Xi and
calling for his resignation. The open letter
blamed President Xi for trying to build a
“personality cult” and abandoning collective
leadership. Those detained included 16
people working for Wujie News, the website
which published the letter on 4 March.
On 4 April the government issued
guidelines to increase law enforcement of
cultural matters in a bid to “safeguard the
‘national cultural and ideological security’”.
The guidelines would increase regulation of
many “illegal” and unauthorized activities,
including: publishing, film and TV
distribution, foreign satellite TV broadcasting,
artistic performances, and imports and
exports of cultural products.
China made further efforts to reinforce its
already oppressive internet censorship
architecture. Thousands of websites and
social media services remain blocked,
including Facebook, Instagram and Twitter,
and internet service and content providers
were required to maintain extensive
censorship on their platforms.
Six journalists from Sichuan-based website
“64 Tianwang” were detained for covering
protests in relation to the G20 Summit in
Hangzhou in September. One, Qin Chao,
remained in detention.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Proposed amendments to the Regulations on
Religious Affairs issued on 7 September
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
would extend power to various authorities to
monitor, control and sanction some religious
practice. The amendments, which
emphasized national security with a goal of
curbing “infiltration and extremism”, could
be used to further suppress the rights to
freedom of religion and belief, especially for
Tibetan Buddhists, Uighur Muslims and
unrecognized churches.
The campaign to demolish churches and
remove Christian crosses from buildings in
Zhejiang province, launched in 2013,
intensified into 2016. According to
international media, more than 1,700 crosses
had been removed by the end of 2016,
prompting a series of protests.
Zhang Kai, a lawyer who offered legal
assistance to the affected churches,
appeared on state television on 25 February,
looking thin and exhausted, to give a
videotaped “confession”. He was initially
detained in 2015 on suspicion of state
security crimes and “disturbing public order”
and was later placed under “residential
surveillance in a designated location”. He
was released without explanation and
returned to his hometown in Inner Mongolia
on 23 March.
On 26 February, Bao Guohua and his wife
Xing Wenxiang, pastors from Jinghua city in
Zhejiang province, were sentenced to 14
years’ and 12 years’ imprisonment
respectively for embezzling money from their
congregation and “gathering a crowd to
disturb social order”. Bao Guohua had been
vocal in opposing the removal of crosses
from churches.
Falun Gong practitioners continued to be
subjected to persecution, arbitrary detention,
unfair trials and torture and other ill-
treatment. Falun Gong practitioner Chen
Huixia was detained in June and, according
to her daughter, tortured in detention
because of her beliefs. 2
DEATH PENALTY
A white paper issued by the government in
September claimed that China “[strictly
controlled] the death penalty and employ[ed]
it with prudence to ensure that it applies only
121to a very small number of extremely serious
criminal offenders”. Statistics related to the
death penalty continued to be classified as
state secrets, making it impossible to verify
the number of death sentences handed down
and executions carried out.
In December the Supreme People’s Court
overturned the murder and rape conviction
against Nie Shubin, who was executed in
1995. The Supreme People’s Court ordered
the retrial and agreed with a lower court
finding that there was a lack of clear
evidence to prove that Nie Shubin was guilty.
TIBET AUTONOMOUS REGION AND
TIBETAN-POPULATED AREAS IN OTHER
PROVINCES
Ethnic Tibetans continued to face
discrimination and restrictions on their rights
to freedom of religion and belief, expression,
association and peaceful assembly. In
August, media reported that Lobsang Drakpa,
a Tibetan monk who was detained by police
in 2015 while staging a solo protest – an
increasingly common form of protest in the
Tibetan-populated areas – was sentenced to
three years’ imprisonment in a closed trial. 3
At least three people set themselves on
fire in Tibetan-populated areas during the
year in protest against repressive policies by
the authorities. The number of known self-
immolations since February 2009 rose
to 146.
A Tibetan blogger known as Druklo was
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment in
February for “inciting separatism” for his
online posts on religious freedom, the Dalai
Lama and other Tibetan issues and his
possession of the banned book Sky Burial. 4
Tashi Wangchuk was detained in January
and charged with “inciting separatism” for
advocating Tibetan language education and
giving an interview to the New York Times. He
remained in detention at the end of the year. 5
Housing rights – forced evictions
In July, the government began demolishing a
large part of Larung Gar, reportedly the
largest Tibetan Buddhist institute in the
world, located in Seda (Serta) County, in the
122
Ganzi (Kardze) Tibetan Autonomous
Prefecture, Sichuan province. Local Chinese
authorities ordered the population of Larung
Gar to be reduced by more than half to 5,000
in order to carry out “correction and
rectification”. Thousands of monks, nuns and
lay people were at risk of forced evictions.
XINJIANG UIGHUR AUTONOMOUS
REGION
In March the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous
Region’s (XUAR) Party Secretary, Zhang
Chunxian, announced that progress had
been made in maintaining social stability in
the region, and that cases of “violent
terrorism” had decreased. Nonetheless, the
government said that it would continue to
maintain indefinitely its “strike hard” stance
against “violent terrorism”.
The government continued to detain
ethnic Uighur writers and Uighur language
website editors. Human rights defender
Zhang Haitao, an ethnic Han, was sentenced
to 19 years’ imprisonment on charges of
“inciting subversion” and “providing
intelligence overseas”. His lawyers believed
that the severity of his sentence was in part
due to his commentary on ethnic issues.
The government continued to violate the
right to freedom of religion, and crack down
on all unauthorized religious gatherings.
Abudulrekep Tumniyaz, deputy director of
the Xinjiang Islamic Association, said in
March that all underground preaching sites
in the XUAR had been shut down.
In October, media reported that several
localities within the XUAR had announced
that they will require all residents to hand in
their passports to the police. Thereafter, all
XUAR residents would be required to present
biometric data – such as DNA samples and
body scan images – before being permitted
to travel abroad. The measure came amid a
security crackdown and greater travel
restrictions targeting ethnic minorities in
the XUAR.
Cultural rights
In August, the provincial government
announced a large-scale plan to send 1,900
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Uighur teachers to schools throughout
mainland China to accompany Uighur
students living in boarding schools in Han-
majority areas. The government pledged to
increase the number of such dispatched
teachers to 7,200 by 2020.
The move is billed as a way to “resist
terrorism, violent extremism and separatism
and promote ethnic solidarity”, but Uighur
groups overseas have criticized the plan as a
means to dilute Uighur cultural identity.
HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE
REGION
Five booksellers who went missing in
Thailand, mainland China and Hong Kong in
late 2015 reappeared on television in
mainland China in January and February of
2016. Gui Minhai, Lui Por, Cheung Chi-ping,
Lee Po and Lam Wing-kee worked for Mighty
Current Media, a Hong Kong company
known for its books on Chinese leaders and
political scandals. Lam Wing-kee returned to
Hong Kong in June and held a press
conference in which he said he was
arbitrarily detained, ill-treated in detention
and forced to “confess”. 6
Students Joshua Wong, Alex Chow and
Nathan Law were tried for their part in events
outside government headquarters in
September 2014 that triggered the pro-
democracy Umbrella Movement. In July
2016, Joshua Wong and Alex Chow were
found guilty of “taking part in an unlawful
assembly” and Nathan Law was found guilty
of “inciting others to take part in an unlawful
assembly”, vague provisions in Hong Kong’s
Public Order Ordinance. Appeals from both
parties were pending at the end of the year.
In November the Standing Committee of
the NPC issued an interpretation of Article
104 of the Hong Kong Basic Law concerning
oath-taking by two pro-independence
legislators. This happened before the Hong
Kong High Court could rule on a parallel case
raised by the Hong Kong government seeking
to disqualify the legislators.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
1. China: Two more activists detained for “June 4 baijiu” (ASA
17/4298/2016)
2. China: Falun Gong practitioner said to have been tortured in
detention: Chen Huixia (ASA 17/4869/2016)
3. China: Tibetan monk imprisoned after protest (ASA 17/4802/2016)
4. China: Tibetan imprisoned for “inciting separatism” (ASA
17/3908/2016)
5. China: Tibetan education advocate detained: Tashi Wangchuk (ASA
17/3793/2016)
6. China: Authorities’ revelations on detained Hong Kong booksellers
“smoke and mirrors” (Press release, 5 February)
COLOMBIA
Republic of Colombia
Head of state and government: Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón
A peace deal reached between the
government and the guerrilla group the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC) was ratified by Congress in
November. This marked the official end of
the five-decade armed conflict between the
two sides after more than four years of
talks. However, there was an increase in
killings of human rights defenders,
including Indigenous, Afro-descendant and
peasant farmer leaders. The peace process
with the second largest guerrilla group, the
National Liberation Army (ELN) had not
begun by the end of the year. Doubts
remained over whether the peace agreement
with the FARC would ensure that all those
suspected of criminal responsibility for
crimes against humanity and war crimes
would be held accountable in line with
international law.
PEACE PROCESS
In June, the government and the FARC
signed a bilateral ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities agreement. 1 This came into force
on 29 August, although a de facto ceasefire
had been in place since 2015. On 24 August,
the two sides reached agreement on a peace
deal, 2 which was signed on 26 September in
Cartagena. 3 However, on 2 October, the
123peace deal was rejected in a referendum, in
part because of concerns over the
agreement’s lax justice provisions.
On 12 November, the two sides
announced a revised peace deal, which was
signed on 24 November. The agreement was
ratified by Congress on 30 November, after
which the FARC was due to begin a six-
month process of demobilization and
disarmament, to be monitored and verified in
part by a mission of unarmed UN observers.
By the end of the year, FARC combatants
had yet to congregate in the concentration
zones from where they were due to start the
demobilization process, because of delays in
making these areas habitable.
On 28 December, Congress approved a
law to provide amnesties or pardons to FARC
combatants and the waiving of criminal
prosecutions for security force personnel not
under investigation for or convicted of crimes
under international law. Those who had
served at least five years in prison for crimes
under international law will, under certain
circumstances, be conditionally released.
Ambiguities in the law could result in many
human rights abusers evading justice.
The modifications made to the peace
agreement did not significantly strengthen
victims’ rights. However, a provision requiring
the FARC to provide an inventory of the
assets it acquired in the conflict, which would
be used to provide reparation to victims,
would, if effectively implemented, be a
positive development.
The peace agreement established a
Special Jurisdiction for Peace – to come into
force once approved by Congress – to
investigate and punish those responsible for
crimes under international law, a truth
commission and a mechanism to locate
and identify those missing as a result of
the conflict.
Despite some positive features, however, it
fell short of international law and standards
on victims’ rights, including punishments that
appeared to be inconsistent with the gravity
of certain crimes and a definition of
command responsibility that could make it
difficult to hold to account FARC and security
124
force commanders for crimes committed by
their subordinates.
On 30 March, the government and the
ELN announced that they would begin peace
talks. However, the process had not started
by the end of the year because of the ELN’s
failure to release one of its high-profile
hostages.
President Santos was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize on 7 October for his role in
securing the peace deal. 4
INTERNAL ARMED CONFLICT
By 1 December 2016, the state’s Victims’
Unit had registered almost 8 million victims
of the conflict since 1985, including some
268,000 killings, most of them of civilians;
more than 7 million victims of forced
displacement; around 46,000 victims of
enforced disappearances; at least 30,000
cases of hostage taking; more than 10,000
victims of torture; and some 10,800 victims
of anti-personnel mines and unexploded
ordnance. The security forces, paramilitaries
and guerrilla groups were responsible for
these crimes.
The de-escalation of hostilities between the
security forces and the FARC during the year
led to a sharp reduction in combat-related
violence affecting civilians. But Indigenous,
Afro-descendant and peasant farmer
communities, especially those living in areas
of interest to agro-industrial, mining and
infrastructure concerns, continued to face
human rights violations and abuses.
In August, four members of the Awá
Indigenous people were shot dead by
unidentified gunmen in three separate
attacks in Nariňo Department. Among the
victims was Camilo Roberto Taicús Bisbicús,
leader of the Awá Indigenous reservation
(resguardo) of Hojal La Turbia, in Tumaco
Municipality.
In March, more than 6,000 people, mainly
from Indigenous and Afro-descendant
communities, were forcibly displaced from
three river areas in Chocó Department as a
result of fighting between armed groups.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17SECURITY FORCES
There were continued reports of unlawful
killings by the security forces, as well as
claims of excessive use of force, especially by
the ESMAD anti-riot police, during protests. 5
On 29 February, soldiers killed peasant
farmer Gilberto de Jesús Quintero in the
hamlet of Tesorito, Tarazá Municipality,
Antioquia Department. The army initially
claimed he was an ELN guerrilla killed in
combat. However, witnesses stated they saw
soldiers attempting to dress the corpse in
military fatigues and the army subsequently
claimed that the killing had been a
military error.
Criminal investigations into extrajudicial
executions implicating members of the
security forces made slow progress. A report
from the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, published in
November, stated that by July the Office of
the Attorney General was investigating 4,190
extrajudicial executions. By February, there
had been a total of 961 convictions of which
only a few involved high-ranking officers.
According to a March report by the Office of
the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights, by the end of 2015, 7,773 members
of the security forces were under
investigation for extrajudicial executions. In
November a judge convicted more than a
dozen members of the army for the unlawful
killing of five young men from Soacha,
Cundinamarca Department, in 2008.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Guerrilla groups
The ELN and the FARC continued to commit
human rights abuses, although cases
attributable to the FARC fell as the peace
process advanced.
Indigenous leaders and journalists were
the targets of death threats. For example, in
June, a man claiming to be from the ELN
telephoned María Beatriz Vivas Yacuechime,
a leader of the Huila Indigenous Regional
Council, and threatened to kill her and her
family. In July, journalist Diego D’Pablos and
cameraman Carlos Melo received text death
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
threats from someone claiming to be from the
ELN. Both men and fellow journalist Salud
Hernández-Mora had been taken hostage
earlier in the year by the ELN in the northern
region of Catatumbo. 6
On 24 March, two men claiming to be
FARC members called at the home of
Indigenous leader Andrés Almendras in the
hamlet of Laguna-Siberia, Caldono
Municipality, Cauca Department. Andrés
Almendras was not at home so the men
asked his daughter where the “snitch” was
as they wanted him to leave the area.
Paramilitaries
Paramilitary groups continued to operate
despite their supposed demobilization a
decade earlier. Acting either alone or in
collusion with state actors, they were
responsible for numerous human rights
violations, including killings and death
threats. 7
In April, local NGOs reported that an
armed group of around 150 paramilitaries
from the Gaitanista Self-Defence Forces of
Colombia (AGC) had entered the Afro-
descendant community of Teguerré, part of
the collective territory of Cacarica, Chocó
Department. There were reports of other AGC
incursions in the Cacarica area throughout
the year. Some community leaders were
threatened by the AGC, which declared them
“military targets”.
There were increasing reports of
paramilitary incursions into the Peace
Community of San José de Apartadó,
Antioquia Department, some of whose
members were threatened. 8
By 30 September, only 180 of the more
than 30,000 paramilitaries who supposedly
laid down their arms in a government-
sponsored demobilization process had been
convicted for human rights-related crimes
under the 2005 Justice and Peace Law; most
appealed against their convictions. Most
paramilitaries did not submit themselves to
the Justice and Peace process and received
de facto amnesties.
125IMPUNITY
Very few of those suspected of responsibility
for conflict-related crimes under international
law were brought to justice. However, as part
of the peace process, the government and
the FARC formally apologized for their role in
several emblematic human rights cases.
On 30 September, in La Chinita, Apartadó
Municipality, Antioquia Department, the
FARC apologized for killing 35 people from
the village on 23 January 1994.
On 15 September, President Santos
formally apologized for the state’s role in the
killing in the 1980s and 1990s of some 3,000
members of the Patriotic Union party, set up
by the Colombian Communist Party and the
FARC as part of the failed peace process with
the government of Belisario Betancur.
In February the Constitutional Court ruled
that a 2015 reform (Legislative Act No. 1)
giving military courts jurisdiction over cases
related to military service and over crimes
committed on active service was
constitutional. The reform also stipulated that
international humanitarian law, rather than
international human rights law, would apply
when investigating armed forces personnel
for conflict-related crimes, even though many
such crimes were not committed during
combat and the victims were overwhelmingly
civilians. However, the Court ruled that
international human rights law should also
apply during investigations. Nevertheless,
there were concerns that the Court’s ruling
would do little to overcome impunity given
the military justice system’s woeful record in
bringing to justice members of the armed
forces implicated in human rights violations.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Threats against and killings of human rights
defenders, especially community leaders,
land rights and environmental activists and
peace and justice campaigners, continued to
be reported in significant numbers. Most of
the threats were attributed to paramilitaries,
but in most cases it was difficult to identify
which groups were responsible for the
killings. According to the NGO Somos
126
Defensores (We are Defenders), at least 75
defenders had been killed by 8 December
2016, compared with 63 during the whole of
2015. In general, these attacks did not occur
in the context of combat between the warring
parties, but were targeted killings. Several
human rights organizations also had sensitive
information stolen from their offices. By 20
December the NGO National Trade Union
School had recorded 17 killings of trade
union members.
On 29 August, three leaders of the NGO
Integration Committee of the Colombian
Massif (CIMA), Joel Meneses, Nereo
Meneses Guzmán and Ariel Sotelo, were shot
dead by a group of armed men in Almaguer
Municipality, Cauca Department.
In August, Ingrid Vergara, a spokesperson
for the National Movement of Victims of State
Crimes (Movice) received a threatening
phone call after attending a public hearing on
human rights in Congress in the capital,
Bogotá. Over the years, Ingrid Vergara and
other members of Movice have been
repeatedly threatened and harassed because
of their human rights work.
LAND RIGHTS
The land restitution process, implemented
since 2012, continued to make only slow
progress in returning land misappropriated
during the conflict to its rightful occupants.
According to the state’s Land Restitution
Unit, by 5 December, land judges had
adjudicated on cases involving some 62,093
hectares claimed by peasant farmers and
131,657 hectares claimed by one Afro-
descendant and four Indigenous
communities.
Land rights activists continued to be
threatened and killed. 9 On 11 September,
Néstor Iván Martínez, an Afro-descendant
leader, was shot dead by unidentified
assailants in Chiriguaná Municipality, Cesar
Department. Néstor Iván Martínez was active
in environmental and land rights campaigns
and had campaigned against mining
activities.
On 29 January, Congress approved Law
1776, which would create large agro-
Amnesty International Report 2016/17industrial projects known as Zones of Rural
Development, Economic and Social Interest
(ZIDRES). Critics argued these could
undermine the land rights of rural
communities.
In February, the Constitutional Court ruled
that legislation stipulating that land restitution
claims would not be permitted in areas
denominated Projects of National and
Strategic Interest (PINES) was
unconstitutional. It ruled that such lands
could be expropriated by the state, but that
land claimants would have the right to a
formal expropriation hearing and to
compensation set by the courts.
On 9 June, the Constitutional Court made
public its December 2015 ruling annulling
three resolutions by the National Mining
Agency and Ministry of Mines and Energy
declaring over 20 million hectares of land,
including Indigenous and Afro-descendant
territories, as Strategic Mining Areas (SMAs).
The Court stated that delimitation of any
SMAs was dependent on seeking the prior
consent of Indigenous and Afro-descendant
communities living in these areas.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Allegations of crimes of sexual violence
continued to be levelled against all parties to
the conflict. By 1 December, the Victims’ Unit
had registered more than 17,500 victims of
conflict-related crimes against sexual integrity
since 1985.
In March, the NGO Follow-up Working
Group on the Constitutional Court’s Judicial
Decrees (Autos) 092 of 2008 and 009 of
2015 issued a report on the state’s
implementation of the two Decrees. The
Decrees highlighted the prevalence of
conflict-related sexual violence against
women and ordered the state to combat
these crimes and bring to justice those
suspected of criminal responsibility. The
report concluded that although the state had
made some progress in investigating these
crimes, it had failed to take effective action to
ensure the right of survivors to truth, justice
and reparation. The vast majority of those
suspected of criminal responsibility for these
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
crimes had yet to be brought to justice by the
end of the year.
In August, the government issued Decree
1314 creating a commission to develop a
Comprehensive Programme of Guarantees
for Women Leaders and Human Rights
Defenders, which would include prevention
and protection mechanisms.
In June, the Office of the Attorney General
issued a Resolution adopting a protocol for
the investigation of crimes of sexual violence.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
In March the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights issued a report which
congratulated the government and the FARC
on the progress made to reach a peace
agreement. However, the High Commissioner
warned that paramilitary groups (referred to
as “post-demobilization groups” in the report)
“constantly undermine human rights and
citizen security, the administration of justice
and peacebuilding, including land restitution.
Dismantling the groups that control stolen
land through the use or threat of violence
represents a permanent challenge to peace”.
In its concluding observations on
Colombia, published in October, the UN
Committee on Enforced Disappearances
acknowledged the efforts made by the
Colombian authorities and noted the
reduction in cases of enforced disappearance
in recent years. However, it expressed
concern about Colombia’s continued failure
to recognize the competence of the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances to
receive and consider communications from
or on behalf of victims as well as the failure to
make meaningful progress in investigating
such crimes.
In November, the UN Human Rights
Council noted the significant reduction in the
conflict’s impact on civilians. However, it
expressed concern about ongoing violations,
including arbitrary deprivations of life,
enforced disappearances, torture, and the
persistence of impunity. It also expressed
concern about abuses by “illegal armed
groups that emerged after the demobilization
of paramilitary organizations” and allegations
127that state actors colluded with some of these
groups.
1. Colombia: Agreement on a bilateral ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities is an historic step forward (AMR 23/4311/2016)
2. Colombia: End of negotiations over conflict brings hopes of peace
(News story, 25 August)
3. Colombia: Historic peace deal must ensure justice and an end to
human rights abuses (News story, 26 September)
4. Colombia: Nobel Peace Prize shows Colombia must not close the door
on hopes of peace with justice (News story, 7 October)
5. Colombia: Security forces must refrain from excessive use of force
during rural protests (AMR 23/4204/2016)
6. Colombia: ELN must release journalists (AMR 23/4134/2016)
7. Colombia: Death threats to defenders and trade unionists (AMR
23/3837/2016)
8. Colombia: Paramilitary activity threatens Peace Community (AMR
23/4998/2016)
9. Colombia: Death threats to Afro-descendant leaders (AMR
23/3938/2016)
CONGO (REPUBLIC
OF THE)
Republic of the Congo
Head of state and government: Denis Sassou Nguesso
Presidential elections were held amid
violence and controversy. Political
opponents were detained for peaceful
criticism of the elections. Security forces
used excessive force and sometimes torture
to curb dissent. A new law further
restricting the space for civil society
organizations was passed.
BACKGROUND
On 20 March, presidential elections were
held under a total communications blackout,
with telephone and internet connections cut.
Denis Sassou Nguesso was re-elected
president.
Amnesty International was denied entry to
the country to monitor the human rights
situation before the presidential elections.
128
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Following the results of presidential elections,
which were contested by the opposition, the
authorities arrested several leading opposition
figures, including senior campaign officials of
presidential candidates Jean-Marie Michel
Mokoko and André Okombi Salissa, accusing
them of compromising national security.
Those arrested and still in detention included
Jean Ngouabi, Anatole Limbongo-Ngoka,
Marcel Mpika, Jacques Banangazala and
Ngambou Roland.
Between 4 April and 14 June, Jean-Marie
Michel Mokoko was kept under de facto
house arrest, with security forces surrounding
his compound without a judicial warrant. He
was arrested on 14 June, charged with
jeopardizing state security and unlawful
possession of weapons and munitions of war,
and was detained at the main prison in the
capital, Brazzaville. He was later also charged
with incitement to disturb public order. André
Okombi Salissa was believed to have fled the
country in June, following a raid by security
forces on his home.
A number of leading political figures,
including Paulin Makaya, leader of the
opposition Unis Pour le Congo, and Okouya
Rigobert of the political group Convention
d'action pour la démocratie et le
développement (CADD) remained in
detention, following their arrest in November
2015 for protesting against changes to the
Constitution. On 25 July, Paulin Makaya was
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment and a
fine of €3,800 for taking part in an
unauthorized protest. An appeal he filed on
the same day was considered on
6 December, more than four months later,
even though the timeline defined by law had
expired and a reminder had been sent to the
relevant authorities. His appeal was
adjourned twice and a decision had not been
taken at the end of the year. He remained a
prisoner of conscience.
The opposition platform “Initiative pour la
démocratie au Congo - Front républicain
pour le respect de l'ordre constitutionnel et
Amnesty International Report 2016/17l'alternance démocratique” (IDC-FROCAD)
claimed that 121 political prisoners remained
in detention in Brazzaville’s main prison.
On 9 November, the authorities denied
authorization for a sit-in organized by the
youth movement “Ras-le-Bol” in Brazzaville.
IDC-FROCAD reported that protests had been
banned on several occasions, generally on
the grounds that they would risk disturbing
public order, and that documents banning
the protests made reference to the April post-
electoral violence in Brazzaville. kidnapped by members of the presidential
security forces in the Sadelmy
neighbourhood of Brazzaville. He said that
his hands and feet were handcuffed, and that
he was subjected to electric shocks and
burned on several occasions with plastic
bags on his back and his hands. He was also
beaten with wooden sticks and a belt, and
spent nine days in a container. He was
released on 13 October and dumped near a
hospital mortuary in Brazzaville. No
investigation was initiated into his allegations.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
Government security forces conducted air
strikes on residential areas in the
southeastern department of Pool on 5 April.
Helicopters dropped at least 30 bombs on
residential areas, including on a school in the
town of Vindza when targeting the former
residence of Pastor Frederic Ntumi, leader of
the “Ninjas” armed group. Officials from Pool
reported that up to 5,000 people had been
displaced. The air strikes followed an
outbreak of violence in Brazzaville following
the endorsement on 4 April by the
Constitutional Court of the result of the
presidential elections, in which gunfire broke
out in the streets, young people raised
barricades in the southern neighbourhood of
Makélékélé, a local mayor’s office and two
police stations were set ablaze and armed
men attacked an army barracks. The
government attributed the violence to the
“Ninjas”.
On 29 April, a joint mission composed of
police, journalists and civil society
organizations to assess the security situation
in Pool and investigate the bombardments
was conducted. It had yet to produce an
official report at the end of the year.
Further air strikes were carried out in Pool
in September; information on the incidents
was limited due to the extreme difficulty in
accessing the area, including because of
restrictions set by the government.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 29 September, Augustin Kala Kala,
deputy national coordinator of CADD, was
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
In September, a draft law regulating civil
society organizations was adopted by the
Senate and was awaiting promulgation by the
President. Civil society organizations had
complained that the law was developed
without meaningful consultation, and that it
limited their freedom of association through
measures that included criminalizing
activities perceived to threaten institutional
stability, preventing religious organizations
from working on political questions, and
requiring approval by the authorities to carry
out activities.
CÔTE D’IVOIRE
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire
Head of state: Alassane Dramane Ouattara
Head of government: Daniel Kablan Duncan
The rights to freedom of expression, of
association and of peaceful assembly were
restricted; scores of opposition members
were arrested. Dozens of detainees still
awaited trial in connection with post-
electoral violence in 2010 and 2011;
concerns remained about selective
accountability for crimes committed during
that period. The trial of Laurent Gbagbo and
Charles Blé Goudé opened at the ICC.
Simone Gbagbo was not transferred to the
ICC despite an outstanding arrest warrant;
her trial before a national court began. The
UN Environment Programme (UNEP)
129launched an audit of the environmental
impact following the dumping of tons of
toxic waste in 2006. Nineteen people
including a child were killed in an attack by
an armed group.
BACKGROUND
Opposition parties protested against the
proposed Constitution introduced following a
national referendum in October. The new
Constitution lifted the age limitation for
presidential candidates, removed a condition
requiring both parents of a candidate to be
Ivorian nationals and created a senate where
one third of its members would be appointed
by the President. In December, the coalition
of the ruling party won legislative elections.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities restricted the rights to
freedom of expression, of association and of
peaceful assembly under laws that
criminalized peaceful protests and other
peaceful expression. More than 70 people,
mostly opposition members, were arrested
and released hours or days later.
In July, Prospère Djandou, Jean Léopold
Messihi and Ange Patrick Djoman Gbata
were arrested while collecting signatures in
support of the release of former President
Laurent Gbagbo, and charged with public
order offences. They were released two
weeks later. In October, following a peaceful
protest against the October referendum, at
least 50 opposition members including
Mamadou Koulibaly, former president of the
National Assembly, were arbitrarily arrested in
Abidjan, and detained for hours. Some were
held in moving police vehicles, a practice
known as “mobile detention”, driven for
kilometres and forced to walk back home.
Some were taken as far as Adzopé, about
100km from the centre of Abidjan.
IMPUNITY
In February, 24 military officers charged with
the assassinations of President Robert Guéi,
his family and bodyguard, Fabien Coulibaly,
in 2002, were tried before the Military
130
Tribunal. Three defendants, including
General Bruno Dogbo Blé, former head of the
Presidential Guard, and Commander
Anselme Séka Yapo were sentenced to life
imprisonment. Ten defendants were
sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment each
and the others were acquitted.
At least 146 supporters of former
President Gbagbo who were arrested
between 2011 and 2015 were still awaiting
trial for crimes allegedly committed during
the post-electoral violence of 2010.
Approximately 87 of them had been in
detention since 2011 or 2012.
Despite President Ouattara’s commitment
to ensure that justice would be applied
equally under his presidency, only those
suspected of being supporters of Laurent
Gbagbo were tried for serious human rights
violations committed during and after the
2010 election. Forces loyal to President
Ouattara who committed serious violations,
including the killing of more than 800 people
in Duékoué in April 2011, and of 13 people
at a camp for internally displaced people in
Nahibly in July 2012, were not prosecuted.
Some of them had been identified by victims’
families; although the killings were
investigated no one was prosecuted by the
end of the year.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
The trial of former President Gbagbo and
Charles Blé Goudé before the ICC began in
January and was ongoing at the end of the
year. In February, President Ouattara
announced that no more Ivorian nationals
would be sent to the ICC for prosecution
because the national justice system was
operational. In May, a national court began
trying the former President’s wife, Simone
Gbagbo, for crimes against humanity, despite
an outstanding ICC warrant for her arrest.
Prior to this, in May 2015, the ICC rejected
Côte d’Ivoire’s appeal against the admissibility
of her case before the Court.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
David Samba, opposition figure and president
of the NGO Coalition des Indignés de Côte
Amnesty International Report 2016/17d’Ivoire, was charged with threatening
national security while he was already serving
a six-month prison sentence for public
disorder. He remained in detention, awaiting
trial on the additional charges at the end of
the year.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prisoners remained held under harsh
conditions and overcrowding at the Maison
d’Arrêt et de Correction, Abidjan’s main
prison. In March, the prison authorities said
that the prison, which had capacity for 1,500
inmates, held 3,694 people. Prisoners
reported that they were forced to pay bribes
of up to 20,000 CFA (US$32) to prisoners
who controlled internal security to avoid
being placed in filthy cells with floors covered
in urine and water. Families were forced to
pay bribes to visit their relatives. Prisoners
responsible for internal security also
administered corporal punishment on other
inmates, resulting in at least three deaths in
2015. The authorities did not take measures
to protect prisoners from these and other
abuses. Health care remained inadequate.
One prison guard and nine prisoners were
killed in February during an exchange of fire
when prisoners staged an uprising.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In July, the UN Environment Programme
(UNEP) undertook an environmental audit of
the lasting impact of the 2006 dumping of
over 540,000 litres of toxic waste in Abidjan.
The waste was produced by the multinational
oil trading company Trafigura. The results
were expected in early 2017. The authorities
reported that there were 15 deaths while
more than 100,000 people sought medical
attention after the dumping including for
serious health issues like respiratory
problems. The authorities had still not
assessed the long-term risks to individuals of
exposure to the chemicals in the waste and
had not monitored victims’ health. Many
victims had not received any compensation
payments and compensation claims against
the company continued.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
In March, armed men attacked three
beachside hotels in Grand Bassam, killing 19
people including a child. The attack was
claimed by al-Mourabitoune, an armed group
based in northern Mali and affiliated to al-
Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). More
than 80 people were arrested in connection
with the attack and, in August, two military
officers were sentenced to 10 years’
imprisonment each after being convicted of
disobedience and criminal association.
CROATIA
Republic of Croatia
Head of state: Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović
Head of government: Andrej Plenković (replaced
Tihomir Orešković in October, who replaced Zoran
Milanović in January)
Croatia experienced a period of political
instability triggered by a no-confidence vote
in the newly appointed government.
Reception conditions for asylum-seekers
were generally adequate; but there was no
coherent long-term social integration policy.
Discrimination against ethnic minorities
persisted. Freedom of the media was
undermined. Heightened nationalist
rhetoric and hate speech contributed to
growing ethnic intolerance and insecurity.
BACKGROUND
A new government was formed in January,
two months after general elections which
failed to produce an outright winner. The
volatile coalition collapsed in June, triggering
a vote of no confidence in the government
led by Tihomir Orešković, and the dissolution
of the Parliament in July. Following elections
in September, the centre-right HDZ party,
that won 61 out of 151 seats, entered
into a coalition with small centre-right
parties and formed a new cabinet led by
Andrej Plenković.
131REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Croatia remained a transit country for
refugees and migrants heading to Western
Europe. Recognizing that only a limited
number of people claimed asylum and
remained in Croatia for an extended period of
time, UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, and
the Council of Europe Commissioner for
Human Rights stated that conditions in
reception centres were adequate. They noted
that there were services available to refugees
and migrants, including psychosocial support
and language education, but that these were
mainly provided by NGOs. Human rights
organizations noted shortcomings in asylum
and immigration legislation, and criticized a
Draft Aliens Law adopted by the government
in May and still under consideration by the
Parliament as of December. The Bill included
provisions criminalizing social and
humanitarian assistance to irregular migrants
and retained measures requiring migrants
subject to deportation to pay the cost of
their accommodation and removal from
the country.
Croatia had received 50 refugees by
December, including 30 Syrians from Turkey,
as a part of the EU resettlement scheme, and
10 asylum-seekers each from Greece and
Italy under the relocation scheme. Croatia
has committed to accept a total of 1,600
refugees and asylum-seekers under the EU
resettlement and relocation schemes until the
end of 2017. While reception conditions
upon arrival in the country remained
adequate, the authorities were yet to
implement a comprehensive policy to ensure
effective long-term social integration of
refugees and migrants.
CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia raised concerns about the
pace and effectiveness of prosecutions by the
national courts of crimes committed during
the 1992-1995 war. The law regulating the
status of civilian victims of war passed in
2015 helped ease access to reparations and
made it easier for survivors to access crucial
132
services, but challenges remained in
providing all victims, especially ethnic
minorities, with equal and effective access to
justice.
For the second consecutive year, no
progress was made in establishing the fate
and whereabouts of 1,600 persons
disappeared during the war.
DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination against ethnic minorities and
Roma remained widespread. The legislative
framework for the prevention of
discrimination provided adequate protection
in law, but was severely under-utilized.
Hate speech
The period of political instability around the
turn of the year was accompanied by a surge
in nationalist rhetoric and hate speech
targeting specific groups, in particular ethnic
Serbs, refugees and migrants. Civil society
groups recorded increased instances of the
media and public officials “evoking fascist
ideology” from the past by promoting the use
of inflammatory iconography and generally
fuelling an anti-minority sentiment.
Although instances of incitement to
discrimination and even violence against
minorities were rarely investigated, courts
regularly prosecuted cases of defamation and
insult to the honour and reputation of
persons. These offences were classified as
serious criminal offences under the Criminal
Code. Journalists remained vulnerable to
prosecution in these cases.
Ethnic minority rights
UNHCR recorded that about 133,000, over
half, of the ethnic Serbs who fled the country
during the war had returned by the end of
2016, but it expressed concern about
persisting obstacles for Serbs to regain
their property.
The number of ethnic minorities employed
in public services was below the national
targets. Serbs faced significant barriers to
employment in both the public and private
labour market. The right to use minority
languages and script continued to be
Amnesty International Report 2016/17politicized and unimplemented in some
towns.
Roma
Despite the authorities’ efforts to improve the
integration of Roma, Roma continued to face
significant barriers to effective access to
education, health, housing and employment.
UNHCR registered 2,800 Roma without
permanent or temporary residence who were
at risk of statelessness. Roma experienced
difficulties obtaining identity documents
which limited their access to public services.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION – MEDIA
AND JOURNALISTS
Persistent threats to freedom of the media
and attacks against journalists continued. In
March, the government abruptly ended the
contracts of nearly 70 editors and journalists
at the public broadcaster Croatian Radio
Television, in what was perceived as an
attempt to influence its editorial policy.
Simultaneously, the authorities decided to
abolish state subsidies for smaller non-profit
media and independent cultural initiatives,
further threatening media pluralism.
Croatia was downgraded from place 54 to
63 in the World Press Freedom Index.
CUBA
Republic of Cuba
Head of state and government: Raúl Castro Ruz
Despite purported political openness,
restrictions on the rights to freedom of
expression, association and movement
continued. Local civil society and
opposition groups reported increased
politically motivated detentions and
harassment of government critics.
BACKGROUND
The re-establishment of relations between the
USA and Cuba in 2015 led to increased trade
and tourism between the two countries in
2016. For example, commercial air services
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
from the USA to Cuba resumed after more
than 50 years.
In March, US President Barack Obama
visited Cuba and met President Raúl Castro,
the first visit to Cuba by a US President in
nearly a century. 1 Fidel Castro died in
November. 2
Millions of tourists, many from the USA
and Europe, visited Cuba in 2016, resulting
in a significant boom in the tourism industry.
Cuban migrants continued to fly to South
and Central American countries and to travel
north overland in order to reach the USA.
Between October 2015 and July 2016, more
than 46,000 Cubans entered the USA,
slightly more than in 2015 and twice as many
as in 2014, according to Pew Research
Centre.
Throughout the year, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)
expressed concern about the situation of
Cuban migrants attempting to reach the USA.
In August, more than 1,000 Cuban migrants
were stranded in Colombia close to the
border with Panama. The IACHR expressed
concern that they did not have access to food
and were at risk of being trafficked. In July,
121 Cuban migrants were allegedly deported
from Ecuador without proper notification
or the opportunity to appeal against
the decisions.
Cuba had not ratified the ICCPR or the
ICESCR, both of which it had signed in
February 2008, nor the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Likewise, Cuba
had not recognized the competence of the
UN Committee against Torture nor the UN
Committee on Enforced Disappearances to
receive and consider communications from
victims or other states parties.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSOCIATION
Despite the re-establishment of relations with
the USA in 2015, Cold War rhetoric
persisted, with political activists and human
rights defenders being publicly described as
“anti-Cuban mercenaries”, “anti-
revolutionary” and “subversive”.
133The judicial system remained under
political control. Laws covering “public
disorder”, “contempt”, “disrespect”,
“dangerousness” and “aggression” were
used in politically motivated prosecutions.
Government critics continued to
experience harassment including “acts of
repudiation” (demonstrations led by
government supporters and involving state
security officials).
The government continued to use
limitations on access to the internet as a key
way of controlling both access to information
and freedom of expression. Only 25% of the
population was able to get online and only
5% of homes had internet access. By
August, there were reportedly 178 public Wi-
Fi spots in the country. However, there were
frequent reports of the Wi-Fi service being
interrupted. The government continued to
block and filter websites, limiting access to
information and criticism of state policies. 3
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Reports continued of government critics and
activists – such as the Ladies in White –
being routinely subjected to arbitrary arrest
and short-term detention for exercising their
rights to freedom of expression, association,
assembly and movement. 4
The authorities engaged in a game of “cat
and mouse” whereby activists were
repeatedly picked up, detained for periods of
between eight and 30 hours and then
released without charge, often several times
a month.
The Cuban Commission for Human Rights
and National Reconciliation documented a
monthly average of 862 arbitrary detentions
between January and November, an increase
compared with the same period in 2015.
Those held for longer periods in
“provisional detention” were often not
charged and their relatives were rarely
provided with documents giving the reasons
for the detention.
In July and August, Guillermo Fariñas, who
was awarded the EU’s Sakharov Prize for
Freedom of Thought in 2010, and other
political activists, mostly from the Patriotic
134
Union of Cuba, went on hunger strike in a
mass protest against what they believed to be
the increasingly violent repression of
dissidents and activists.
At the end of the year, graffiti artist and
prisoner of conscience Danilo Maldonado
Machado, known as El Sexto, was being held
in El Combinado del Este, a maximum
security prison on the outskirts of the capital,
Havana. Danilo Machado was arrested in his
home on 26 November, hours after the
announcement of Fidel Castro’s death. The
same day, Cuba-based newspaper 14ymedio
reported that he had written the words “He’s
gone” (Se fue) on a wall in Havana. 5
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
Independent human rights organizations and
mechanisms, including UN Special
Rapporteurs, did not have access to Cuba.
Independent monitors were also denied
access to prisons. Cuba remained the only
country in the Americas region which
Amnesty International did not have
permission from authorities to visit.
1. Obama-Castro encounter: More than a handshake needed to thaw the
Cold War’s human rights (News story, 21 March)
2. Fidel Castro’s human rights legacy: A tale of two worlds (News story,
26 November)
3. Six facts about censorship in Cuba (News story, 11 March)
4. Americas: Open Letter from Amnesty International to US President
Barack Obama, Cuban President Raul Castro and Argentine President
Mauricio Macri (AMR 01/3666/2016)
5. Cuba: Graffiti artist transferred to new prison: Danilo Maldonado
Machado (AMR 25/5279/2016)
CYPRUS
Republic of Cyprus
Head of state and government: Nicos Anastasiades
Detention conditions for refugees and
migrants continued to be inadequate.
Concerns were expressed by the Council of
Europe Commissioner on Human Rights on
the impact of austerity measures on
vulnerable groups. Two officers were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17convicted for the beating of a detainee at a
police station in 2014.
BACKGROUND
In May’s parliamentary elections, the far-right
National Popular Front party won its first two
seats. During the year, the Greek-Cypriot and
Turkish-Cypriot leaders continued their
negotiations regarding the reunification of the
island and achieved progress on governance
and power-sharing, EU matters and property.
However, divergences remained and, in
November, the two leaders failed to reach an
agreement. In December, the two leaders
decided to re-engage in negotiations.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, the UN Subcommittee on the
Prevention of Torture urged Cyprus to
improve detention conditions in immigration
detention centres and police stations. During
the same month, the European Court of
Human Rights found Cyprus in breach of the
right to liberty due to the lack of effective
remedies available to a Syrian national to
challenge the lawfulness of his detention
(Mefaalani v Cyprus). The applicant had
been held for the purposes of removal
between August 2010 and January 2011 and
was then deported to Syria.
In September, the Nikosia District Court
approved the extradition of Seif el-Din
Mostafa, who is accused of hijacking an
EgyptAir plane and redirecting it to land in
Larnaka in March 2016. Concerns were
expressed that, if returned to Egypt, Seif el-
Din Mostafa would be at real risk of torture or
ill-treatment. In October, he challenged his
detention and extradition before the
Supreme Court.
In September, 30 refugees started a
protest outside Parliament against delays in
their naturalization application processes.
Most of the protesters have been living in
Cyprus for more than ten years. They face
obstacles in integrating on account of their
temporary residence status, inability to travel
abroad and limited access to employment.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
In March, the Commissioner of Human
Rights of the Council of Europe expressed his
concerns over the impact of the economic
crisis and the measures taken in the context
of the European Economic Adjustment
Programme on vulnerable social groups such
as children, women and migrant families.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Between January and the end of the year, the
Committee of Missing Persons in Cyprus
(CMP) exhumed the remains of 96 people,
bringing the total number of exhumations
since 2006 to 1,192. Between 2007 and
2016, the remains of 740 missing individuals
(556 Greek Cypriots and 184 Turkish
Cypriots) were identified. With information
from private individuals drying up and CMP
access to Turkish military files continuing to
be obstructed, the rate of exhumation and
identification of remains was starting to
slow down.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In May, a court in Paphos found two police
officers guilty of causing grievous bodily harm
and inflicting inhuman and degrading
treatment on a man held in Chrysochous
police station in February 2014. The ill-
treatment was caught on CCTV and
uncovered in August 2015. Following the
trial, the Commissioner for Administration
and Human Rights expressed her concerns
over the stance of police officers supporting
the actions of the perpetrators.
In August, a female police officer was
caught on video racially abusing a migrant
held in the Mennogeia immigration detention
centre. A disciplinary investigation into the
incident was initiated.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In September, a court in Nikosia acquitted
Doros Polykarpou, the Director of the NGO
KISA, of charges of assaulting a police officer
in April 2013. Earlier in the year, the police
135officer was found guilty of verbally assaulting
Doros Polykarpou. implementing such measures by the end of
the year.
CZECH REPUBLIC RACISM AND XENOPHOBIA
Czech Republic
Head of state: Miloš Zeman
Head of government: Bohuslav Sobotka
The government adopted measures aimed at
addressing concerns from the European
Commission on discrimination against
Roma children in education. Anti-refugee
and anti-migrant protests continued and
groups supporting refugees faced threats
from far-right groups.
DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
Right to education
On 1 September, an amendment to the
School Act came into force. It had been
adopted in 2015 in response to infringement
proceedings launched by the European
Commission under the Race Equality
Directive. Positive reforms included support
measures for children identified as having
special educational needs; the introduction of
a compulsory year of kindergarten for all
pupils; and the aim for all children with “mild
mental disabilities” to be integrated into
mainstream education and be provided with
inclusive education. National and
international NGOs welcomed the reforms,
highlighting, however, that further measures
were required to tackle prejudicial attitudes
against Roma children and provide sufficient
resources for the educational support of
those pupils who require it.
Forced sterilization
In March, the UN CEDAW Committee
recommended establishing a mechanism for
providing compensation to Roma women who
were victims of forced sterilization, and the
appointment of an independent body to
investigate the full extent of the
consequences of forced sterilization. The
government had not taken any steps towards
136
Anti-migrant and anti-refugee protests
continued. In February, thousands of people
participated in an anti-refugee demonstration
in the capital Prague, after which the office of
the refugee rights organization Klinika was
attacked, resulting in one person being
injured. In April, several businesses taking
part in the “hate-free zones” campaign in
Prague were attacked and sprayed with hate
messages and far-right symbols. In
September, five people were charged with
criminal damage and “expression of
sympathy for a movement aimed at
suppressing human rights and freedoms”.
This was followed by a several-hundred-
strong “anti-hate” demonstration in the city.
President Zeman continued to present
refugees and asylum-seekers as “a threat”
and used anti-migrant rhetoric. In August, a
man fired shots into the air and shouted
racist abuse at a Roma children’s summer
camp in Jiřetín pod Jedlovou, village, Děčin
District. According to camp organizers, local
police did not send officers to the scene
despite the camp managers’ repeated
requests for help. In September, a regional
police office investigation dismissed these
claims but found that the incident was not
investigated thoroughly.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The government agreed to continue with
resettlement and the EU-sanctioned
relocation scheme but with in-depth security
checks. Only 52 refugees were resettled and
12 were relocated to the country by the end
of the year. The routine detention of asylum-
seekers and migrants continued.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In June, the Constitutional Court found that
Section 13(2) of the Registered Partnership
Act, which prohibited an individual in a
same-sex registered partnership from
adopting children and being the sole
Amnesty International Report 2016/17custodian of the child, was unconstitutional;
the provision was repealed. However, joint
adoptions by LGBTI couples in a same-sex
registered partnership, where both partners
would then have full parental rights,
remained prohibited. violations. Both the armed forces and the
UN peacekeeping force MONUSCO (UN
Organization Stabilization Mission in the
DRC) were unable to protect civilians
adequately.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS Political disagreement over whether President
Kabila could stay in office after his second
term ended on 19 December triggered
numerous protests. In March, the National
Independent Electoral Commission
announced that the elections could not be
held within the constitutional timeframe. In
May, the Constitutional Court ruled that the
President could remain in office beyond 19
December until his successor was in place.
In October, it ruled again that the presidential
elections could be deferred. The opposition
and civil society questioned the legality of the
second judgment as it was issued by five
judges instead of the seven required by law.
An agreement following a dialogue led by the
AU that deferred the elections to April 2018
was rejected by the majority of the political
opposition, civil society and youth
movements. On 31 December, following
mediation by the Catholic Church, a new
agreement was signed by representatives of
the majority coalition, the opposition and civil
society organizations. The agreement
included commitments that President Kabila
would not stand for a third term and that
elections would be held by the end of 2017.
The political uncertainty contributed to
increasing tensions in the east of the DRC,
which remained beset by armed conflict.
Heightened intercommunal and ethnic
tensions in the prolonged pre-electoral
period, coupled with weak administrative and
security responses, fuelled violence and
recruitment into armed groups.
The joint DRC armed forces-MONUSCO
operation “Sokola 2” continued efforts to
neutralize the Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) – an armed
group based in eastern DRC comprising
Rwandan Hutus linked to the 1994 Rwanda
genocide. The operation failed to capture
FDLR commander Sylvestre Mudacumura.
In May, the Czech Republic signed the
Council of Europe Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and
domestic violence, with the intention of
ratifying it by mid-2018. In March, the
CEDAW Committee noted the low number of
gender discrimination lawsuits filed in the
country and recommended the introduction
of a free legal aid system for such
proceedings. The Committee also expressed
concern about the continued gender pay gap
of approximately 21%, the third highest in
the EU.
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE
CONGO
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Head of state: Joseph Kabila
Head of government: Samy Badibanga Ntita (replaced
Augustin Matata Ponyo Mapon in November)
The Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) experienced political unrest during
the year with protests over the end of
President Kabila’s mandate.
Demonstrations were met with excessive
use of force by security agents as well as
violations of the rights to freedom of
expression, of association and of peaceful
assembly. Armed conflicts continued in the
east: armed groups committed numerous
abuses against civilians, including summary
executions, killings, abductions, acts of
sexual violence and looting of property; and
security forces carried out extrajudicial
executions and other human rights
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
BACKGROUND
137Hundreds of South Sudanese fighters
affiliated to the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army-In-Opposition (SPLA-IO) crossed into
the DRC following fighting in the South
Sudanese capital Juba in July (see South
Sudan entry).
A worsening economic crisis exacerbated
already high levels of poverty, and there were
outbreaks of cholera and yellow fever
resulting in hundreds of deaths.
FREEDOMS OF ASSOCIATION
AND ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was violated, mostly in connection with
protests against an extended term for
President Kabila. Numerous protests, most
organized by the political opposition, were
declared unauthorized even though DRC law
and international law only require organizers
to notify local authorities, not obtain
authorization. By contrast, assemblies
organized by the Presidential Majority, the
ruling coalition, largely took place without
interference by the authorities.
Blanket bans on public protests were
imposed or maintained in the capital
Kinshasa, the cities of Lubumbashi and
Matadi, and the provinces of Mai-Ndombe
(ex-Bandundu Province) and Tanganyika.
During the year, 11 activists from the youth
movement Struggle for Change (LUCHA)
were convicted of offences because they
participated in or organized peaceful
protests. In addition, over 100 activists from
LUCHA and the pro-democracy youth
movement Filimbi were arrested before,
during or just after peaceful protests. These
and other youth movements, who called on
President Kabila to stand down at the end of
his second term, were branded as
insurrectionary. Local authorities declared
them “illegal” due to their lack of registration
even though neither national nor international
law makes registration a precondition for
establishing an association.
The authorities also prohibited private
meetings to discuss politically sensitive
issues, including the elections. Civil society
and political opposition parties faced
138
obstacles renting facilities for conferences,
meetings or other events. On 14 March, a
meeting at a hotel in Lubumbashi between
Pierre Lumbi, President of the Social
Movement for Renewal (MSR), and MSR
members was forcefully stopped by the
National Intelligence Agency.
Government officials, including the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights,
threatened to close human rights
organizations under restrictive interpretations
of laws governing NGO registration.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Security forces consistently broke up
peaceful protests using unnecessary,
excessive and sometimes lethal force,
including tear gas and live ammunition.
On 19 September, security forces killed
dozens of people in Kinshasa during a protest
calling on President Kabila to step down at
the end of his second term.
Protests against Kabila’s refusal to leave
power broke out again on 19 and 20
December. Dozens of people were killed by
the security forces in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi,
Boma and Matadi. Hundreds were arbitrarily
arrested before, during and after the protests.
Security forces also killed protesters
participating in demonstrations over other
grievances in Baraka, Beni, Ituri and Kolwezi.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression was
restricted and constantly violated in the pre-
election context. 1 Politicians who advocated
against an extension of President Kabila’s
second term were particularly targeted.
Military police detained opposition leader
Martin Fayulu for half a day in February while
he was mobilizing support for a general strike
calling for respect for the Constitution. In
May, the police in Kwilu Province prevented
him from holding three political meetings.
The police prevented Moise Katumbi,
former Governor of the then Katanga
Province and a presidential aspirant, from
addressing public gatherings after he left
President Kabila’s party, the People’s Party
for Reconstruction and Democracy. In May,
Amnesty International Report 2016/17the prosecutor opened an investigation
against Moise Katumbi for alleged
recruitment of mercenaries, but later allowed
him to leave the country to receive medical
care. Another court case was then brought
against Moise Katumbi, relating to a real
estate dispute, and he was sentenced in his
absence to three years’ imprisonment.
This rendered him ineligible to stand for
the presidency.
On 20 January, the Minister of
Communication and Media decreed the
closure of Radio-Television Nyota and
Television Mapendo – both owned by Moise
Katumbi – on the basis that they had not
complied with their tax obligations. The state-
run media regulatory agency, Higher Council
for Broadcasting and Communication, said
that taxes had been paid and called for the
stations to be reopened. Despite this, both
remained closed.
Dozens of journalists were arbitrarily
detained. On 19 and 20 September, at least
eight journalists of international and national
outlets were arrested and detained while
covering the protests. Several of them
were harassed, robbed and beaten by
security forces.
On 5 November, the signal of Radio
France Internationale (RFI) was blocked and
remained blocked at the end of the year.
Around the same time, the signal of Radio
Okapi, the UN radio station, was interrupted
over a period of five days. On 12 November,
the Communication and Media Minister
issued a decree barring radio stations without
a physical presence in the DRC from having
a local frequency. The decree stated that,
from December, the stations could only
broadcast through a Congolese partner radio
station with the agreement of the Minister.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
At least three human rights defenders were
killed by known or suspected security agents
in Maniema, North Kivu and South Kivu
provinces. A police officer was convicted of
the killing of the human rights defender in
Maniema and sentenced to life
imprisonment; the sentence was reduced to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
36 months on appeal. A trial in relation to the
killing in North Kivu started in September.
The authorities increasingly targeted
human rights defenders who took a public
stand on the presidential term limit or
documented politically motivated human
rights violations. Many defenders faced
arbitrary arrest, harassment and increased
pressure to stop their activities.
In February, the South Kivu government
promulgated a decree on the protection of
human rights defenders and journalists. At
the national level, the UN, the National
Human Rights Commission and several
human rights NGOs worked on a proposal for
a law to protect human rights defenders, but
it has not yet been discussed in parliament.
CONFLICT IN EASTERN DRC
Human rights abuses remained rampant in
eastern DRC, where conflict continued. The
absence of state authorities and gaps in the
protection of civilians led to deaths.
Abuses by armed groups
Armed groups committed a wide range of
abuses including: summary executions;
abductions; cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment; rape and other sexual violence;
and the looting of civilian property. The
FDLR, the Forces for Patriotic Resistance in
Ituri (FRPI) and various Mai-Mai armed
groups (local and community-based militias)
were among those responsible for abuses
against civilians. The Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) continued to be active and commit
abuses in areas bordering South Sudan and
the Central African Republic.
In Beni area, North Kivu, civilians were
massacred, usually by machetes, hoes and
axes. On the night of 13 August, 46 people
were killed in Rwangoma, a neighbourhood
of Beni, by suspected members of the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), an armed group
from Uganda that maintains bases in
eastern DRC.
Violations by the security forces
Soldiers committed human rights violations
during operations against armed groups.
139They also extrajudicially executed civilians
protesting against the lack of government
protection.
Violence against women and girls
Hundreds of women and girls were subjected
to sexual violence in conflict-affected areas.
Perpetrators included soldiers and other state
agents, as well as combatants of armed
groups such as Raia Mutomboki (a coalition
of groups), the FRPI and Mai-Mai Nyatura, a
Hutu militia.
Child soldiers
Hundreds of children were recruited by
armed groups, including the FRPI, Mai-Mai
Nyatura, joint forces of the FDLR and its
official armed wing Forces Combattantes
Abacunguzi (FOCA), and the Patriotic Union
for the Defense of the Innocent (UDPI). Child
soldiers continued to be used as combatants
and also to cook, clean, collect taxes and
carry goods.
Communal violence
Intercommunal violence between the Hutu
and Nande communities escalated in Lubero
and Walikale Territories of North Kivu. Both
communities received support from armed
groups – the Hutu community from the FDLR
and the Nande community from Mai-Mai
groups – which resulted in high death tolls
and extensive damage to civilian property. In
January and February, the fighting reached
alarming levels. On 7 January, the FDLR
killed at least 14 people from the Nande
community in the village of Miriki, south
Lubero Territory. When the local population
staged protests against the lack of protection
following the attack, the army fired live
bullets, killing at least one protester. A few
weeks later, at least 21 people from the Hutu
community were killed, 40 wounded and
dozens of houses burned in attacks by
Nande militia.
On 27 November, over 40 people were
killed during an attack on a Hutu village by a
Nande self-defence group.
In Tanganyika province, clashes between
Batwa and Luba communities revived in
140
September resulting in many deaths and
much material damage. Continuing clashes
resulted in summary executions, sexual
violence and mass displacement. According
to local chiefs and civil society organizations,
over 150 schools in the district were burned
down during intercommunal clashes.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Fighting between the army and armed groups
caused high levels of displacement. In
February, over 500,000 Congolese refugees
were registered in neighbouring countries. By
1 August, 9 million internally displaced
people (IDPs) were registered in the DRC, the
majority of them in North and South Kivu
Provinces.
Following allegations that members of
armed groups, especially the FDLR, were
hiding in the camps, the government closed
several IDP camps that had been set up in
collaboration with UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency. The closures affected an estimated
40,000 displaced people, led to further
displacement and insecurity, and were widely
criticized by humanitarian organizations.
During the closures, numerous displaced
people were victims of human rights
violations by soldiers.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
State agents as well as members of armed
groups perpetrated acts of torture and other
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
The National Intelligence Agency was
responsible for abductions and forms of
prolonged incommunicado detention that
breach the right of detainees to be treated
with humanity and the absolute prohibition of
torture or other ill-treatment.
IMPUNITY
Very few state agents, especially at senior
levels, or combatants of armed groups were
prosecuted for and convicted of human rights
violations and abuses. A lack of both funding
and judicial independence continued to pose
major barriers to accountability for such
crimes.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17On 11 October, Gedeon Kyungu Mutanga
surrendered with over 100 Mai-Mai
combatants to the Haut-Katanga Province
authorities. He had escaped from prison in
2011 after being sentenced to death for
crimes against humanity, insurgency and
terrorism.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Overcrowding, dilapidated infrastructure and
under-funding contributed to dire prison
conditions. Most of the prison population
comprised detainees awaiting trial.
Malnutrition, infectious diseases and an
absence of appropriate health care led to the
deaths of at least 100 prisoners. An
estimated 1,000 prisoners escaped.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
Extreme poverty remained widespread.
According to the World Food Programme, an
estimated 63.6% of the population were
living below the national poverty line and
lacking access to basic needs such as
adequate food, safe drinking water,
sanitation, adequate health services and
education. According to the estimates, over 7
million people were food insecure and nearly
half of all children under the age of five were
suffering from chronic malnutrition. An
economic crisis led to a sharp fall in the value
of the Congolese franc against the US dollar,
hitting hard the purchasing power of the
population.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Although the Constitution guarantees free
primary education, the school system
continued to function because of the
institutionalized practice of school fees
covering teachers’ wages and school
expenses. Youth activists who protested
peacefully in Bukavu, South Kivu, against the
school fees at the beginning of the school
year in September were arrested and held for
short periods.
Armed conflict had a severe impact on
education. Dozens of schools were used as
IDP camps or as military bases for the army
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
or armed groups. Thousands of children were
unable to attend school because of the
destruction of schools or the displacement of
teachers and pupils.
1. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Dismantling dissent − repression
of expression amidst electoral delays (AFR 62/4761/2016)
DENMARK
Kingdom of Denmark
Head of state: Queen Margrethe II
Head of government: Lars Løkke Rasmussen
The government introduced serious
restrictions to asylum and migration laws
and suspended an agreement with UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, to accept refugees
for resettlement. Procedural rules created
delays for transgender people seeking legal
gender recognition. A claim by Iraqis for
torture against the Ministry of Defence was
ruled admissible.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In January, Parliament amended the Aliens
Act, restricting the right to family
reunification. Individuals granted subsidiary
protection status had to wait for three years
before being eligible to apply for family
reunification. In October, four Syrians who
had been granted protection started legal
action against the government, on the
grounds that the amendments violated their
right to family life.
In August, the UN Human Rights
Committee criticized the amendments and
raised concern about a further amendment to
the Act which introduced the possibility of
confiscating asylum-seekers’ assets as a
contribution towards the costs of their
reception. The same bill also included a
provision which gave the executive power to
suspend judicial oversight over the detention
of migrants and asylum-seekers when the
government considered there was a large
influx of people to the country.
141In June, the government introduced
further restrictions to its “tolerated stay”
regime, which applied to individuals it
excluded from protection because they had
committed a felony in Denmark or were
believed to have committed war crimes or
non-political crimes elsewhere, but who
could not be deported to their country of
origin as they faced a real risk of human
rights violations there. The government
declared its intention to make their stay “as
intolerable as possible”. The new restrictions
included compulsory overnight stay at
Kærshovedgård centre, about 300km outside
Copenhagen, to separate individuals from
their families. Those who breached their
“tolerated stay” obligations faced potential
custodial sentences in regular prisons. At the
end of the year, 68 people were on “tolerated
stay”.
In October, the government deferred
implementing the agreement with UNHCR
to receive 500 refugees annually for
resettlement from refugee camps around
the world.
DISCRIMINATION – TRANSGENDER
PEOPLE
Procedural rules set by the Danish Health
Authority on access to hormone treatment
and gender-affirming surgery unreasonably
prolonged the gender recognition process for
transgender people. The tests and
questionnaires required focused on sexual
conduct which many transgender people
reported finding humiliating. Only one clinic
was authorized to prescribe hormone
treatment to transgender people. The Health
Authority’s procedural guidelines for gender-
affirming treatment were under review at the
end of the year.
In May, the Parliament adopted a
landmark resolution to end the
pathologization of transgender identities as a
“mental disorder” by the beginning of 2017.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In August, the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed concern about Denmark’s overly
broad definition of terrorism in the Criminal
142
Code and about police powers to intercept
communications which may result in mass
surveillance. The Committee urged the
government to conduct a comprehensive
review of its counter-terrorism powers to
ensure compliance with international human
rights law.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In August, the Eastern High Court ruled
admissible a civil damages lawsuit brought
against the Ministry of Defence by 11 Iraqi
nationals. They alleged they were tortured by
Iraqi soldiers during a military operation run
by Danish soldiers in Basra, Iraq, in 2004. A
substantive hearing was expected to take
place in 2017.
DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
Dominican Republic
Head of state and government: Danilo Medina Sánchez
A law to reform the police finally entered
into force. A reform to the Criminal Code
that maintained the criminalization of
abortion in almost all circumstances was
approved by Congress. Many people
remained stateless. Consultations were held
on a draft anti-discrimination bill.
BACKGROUND
Legislative, presidential and local elections
were held in May. Danilo Medina Sánchez of
the ruling Dominican Liberation Party (PLD)
was re-elected as President. The PLD
maintained its control over the two chambers
of Congress. A number of openly lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) candidates ran for seats in legislative
and local elections to increase their political
visibility and participation.
In January the Dominican Republic took
over the presidency of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States. The
General Assembly of the Organization of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17American States (OAS) was held in Santo
Domingo, the capital, in June.
New members were appointed to the
Central Electoral Board, the institution in
charge of the civil registry that has
continuously limited access to identity
documents for Dominicans of Haitian
descent.
The government failed to finalize and
implement a draft National Human Rights
Plan after consulting in 2015 with human
rights organizations.
A comprehensive anti-discrimination bill
was drafted and shared for consultation with
various sectors of society. If adopted, it
would be the first legislation of its kind in
the Caribbean.
Tens of thousands of people were
displaced due to massive flooding in October
and November affecting large areas of the
north of the country.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
The Office of the Prosecutor General reported
74 killings by security forces between
January and June, representing nearly 10%
of all killings in the country. Many killings
took place in circumstances suggesting that
they may have been unlawful.
After years of discussion, a new law on
police reform (Law 590-16) was passed
in July.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued to deport
significant numbers of people of Haitian
origin, including Haitian migrants and their
families. According to the International
Organization for Migration, the authorities
deported more than 40,000 persons to Haiti
between January and September, while
nearly 50,000 more individuals
“spontaneously” left the Dominican Republic,
in some cases following threats or for fear of
violent deportations. More than 1,200
presumed unaccompanied children were
identified at the Dominican-Haitian border.
Despite some improvements in the way
deportations were carried out by officials, the
authorities failed to fully respect international
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
safeguards against arbitrary deportations. For
example, the authorities failed to serve
deportation orders or to provide mechanisms
allowing people who had been brought to detention
centres and deported to challenge the
legality, necessity and proportionality of
detention as well as the deportation itself. 1
DISCRIMINATION – STATELESS
PERSONS
In February the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights published a report on the
situation of human rights in the Dominican
Republic and concluded that “the situation of
statelessness... that has not yet been
completely corrected after the measures
adopted by the Dominican State, is of a
magnitude never before seen in the
Americas.”
From August 2015 to July 2016, UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, verified 1,881 cases
of Dominican-born individuals who had
arrived in Haiti, voluntarily or following
expulsions, and who were stateless or at risk
of statelessness. Contrary to international law,
a number of Dominican-born individuals
were expelled from the Dominican Republic
to Haiti – something the Dominican
authorities continuously failed to
acknowledge.
Despite measures adopted by the
government in 2014, tens of thousands of
people, mainly of Haitian descent, remained
stateless by the end of 2016. 2 No steps were
taken to find any solution for Dominican-born
people of foreign descent whose birth had
never been registered in the Dominican Civil
Registry (so-called “Group B”) and who
could not apply for the naturalization plan
provided by Law 169-14. 3
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In September, lawyer and human rights
defender Genaro Rincón Mieses was verbally
and physically assaulted in the capital, Santo
Domingo, for his work in protecting the rights
of Dominicans of Haitian descent. 4 The
attack took place in a context of increased
reports of threats, insults and intimidation
against human rights defenders combating
143statelessness. No one had been held
accountable for the attack by the end of
the year.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In December, Congress approved a new
version of the Criminal Code, after many
years of discussion. 5 The reform maintained
the criminalization of abortion while providing
for one restrictive exception, whereby
abortion would be decriminalized where the
pregnancy posed a risk to the life of a
pregnant woman or girl but only after “all
attempts had been made to save both the
lives of the woman and the foetus”. Women’s
rights groups raised concerns that the
exception would make it impossible in
practice for women and girls whose lives
were at risk to access abortion services.
5. Dominican Republic: President Medina must stop a regressive reform
for women’s rights (News story, 15 December)
ECUADOR
Republic of Ecuador
Head of state and government: Rafael Vicente Correa
Delgado
Critics of the authorities, including human
rights defenders, faced prosecution,
harassment and intimidation; the rights to
freedom of expression and of association
were restricted. The right to free, prior and
informed consent relating to development
projects which adversely affected
livelihoods, was denied to Indigenous
Peoples.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS BACKGROUND
According to official statistics, the first six
months of the year saw a 2% increase in the
number of killings of women and girls,
compared with the same period in 2015.
By May the number of complaints received
by the authorities for acts of sexual violence
had increased by nearly 10% compared with
the same period in 2015.
Parliament had yet to adopt a
comprehensive law to prevent and address
violence against women that had been
approved by the Senate in 2012. RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE The UN Human Rights Committee expressed
concerns about violations of the ICCPR
including: the repeated use by police of force
against peaceful demonstrations; legal
provisions which threatened the rights to
freedom of association and assembly; delays
to legislative reform to allow adequate
consultation with Indigenous Peoples and
Nationalities and other communities. It
recommended that increased efforts be
made to end discrimination against lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people, and that violence against
women and sexual violence in schools
be addressed.
Civil society organizations continued to report
hate crimes against LGBTI people,
particularly murders of transgender women. FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSOCIATION
1. “Where are we going to live?”: Migration and statelessness in
the Dominican Republic and Haiti (AMR 36/4105/2016)
2. “Without paper, I am no one”: Stateless people in the Dominican
Republic (AMR 27/2755/2015)
3. Dominican Republic’s absurd laws shatter star boxer’s promising
career (News story, 4 February); Dominican Republic: 50,000 people
demand solution to crisis of “ghost citizens“ (Press release, 20
September)
4. Dominican Republic: Defender combatting statelessness attacked:
Genaro Rincon (AMR 27/4901/2016)
144
In April, Indigenous Peoples’ leaders
appeared before the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and
condemned restrictions on their right to
freedom of association.
In September, the authorities dissolved the
National Union of Teachers (UNE), on
grounds that it had not registered its
executive board with the authorities.
In December, the Interior Ministry filed a
complaint against the Ecological Action
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Corporation, accusing it of violent acts after it
published information about the possible
environmental impact of mining activities on
the Morona Santiago province. Consequently,
the organization remained under threat
of closure.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In January, the Kichwa People of Sarayaku
denounced government negotiations aimed
at granting permission to international
companies to extract oil from their territory
without consulting the community. 1
In June, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights issued a resolution in the
Kichwa Indigenous People of Sarayaku v
Ecuador case. It acknowledged that the state
had complied with most of the orders
contained in its 2012 ruling. The Court
requested further information from the
government regarding the obligation to
provide permanent training and capacity
building to help judicial functionaries resolve
cases where the rights of Indigenous Peoples
had been violated. In December the Court
held a hearing on state compliance with court
orders relating to the removal of explosives
from Sarayaku territory and the right of the
people affected by such measures to enjoy
prior consultation. The Court is expected to
issue its resolution in 2017.
In December, following a series of violent
acts and harassment by the authorities
against the Shuar Indigenous Peoples for
their opposition to a mining project in Morona
Santiago, the government declared a state of
emergency in the area and arrested the
President of the Interprovincial Federation of
Shuar Centres, Agustín Wachapá.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In January, campesino leaders Manuel
Trujillo and Manuela Pacheco were accused
of “terrorism” after they participated in a
campaign to oppose the construction of a
hydroelectric plant that the community
believed would restrict their right to water. 2
They were acquitted later that month due to
lack of evidence.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
In July, a co-ordinator of the
Ombudsman’s Office rejected a complaint by
the Women Defenders of Mother Earth Front
who alleged that they were assaulted and
arbitrarily arrested during a peaceful protest
against a mining project in the province of
Cuenca. The women requested that the
decision be reviewed in line with the
Ombudsman’s procedures. There was no
decision by the end of the year.
1. Una vez más Ecuador estaría ignorando los derechos de los pueblos
indígenas en favor de la explotación petrolera (AMR 28/3360/2016)
2. Ecuador: Community leaders accused of terrorism (AMR
28/3205/2016)
EGYPT
Arab Republic of Egypt
Head of state: Abdel Fattah al-Sisi
Head of government: Sherif Ismail
The authorities used mass arbitrary arrests
to suppress demonstrations and dissent,
detaining journalists, human rights
defenders and protesters, and restricted the
activities of human rights organizations.
The National Security Agency (NSA)
subjected hundreds of detainees to
enforced disappearance; officers of the NSA
and other security forces tortured and
otherwise ill-treated detainees. Security
forces used excessive lethal force during
regular policing and in incidents that may
have amounted to extrajudicial executions.
Mass unfair trials continued before civilian
and military courts. The authorities failed to
adequately investigate human rights
violations and bring perpetrators to justice.
Women continued to face sexual and
gender-based violence. The government
continued to restrict religious minorities
and prosecuted people for defamation of
religion. Individuals faced imprisonment for
“debauchery” on the basis of their
perceived sexual orientation. Hundreds of
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants were
detained while seeking to cross the
145Mediterranean Sea. Courts continued to
hand down death sentences; executions
were carried out.
BACKGROUND
The newly elected House of Representatives
convened on 10 January and had 15 days to
review and approve legislative decrees issued
by President al-Sisi in the absence of a
parliament. It approved almost all such laws,
including the Counter-Terrorism Law (Law 94
of 2015) that eroded fair trial safeguards and
wrote emergency-style powers into
domestic law.
Egypt remained part of the Saudi Arabia-
led military coalition engaged in the armed
conflict in Yemen (see Yemen entry). In
January, President al-Sisi approved legislation
authorizing the armed forces to operate
outside Egypt for a further year.
Relations between Egypt and Italy
deteriorated after Italian PhD student Giulio
Regeni died in mysterious circumstances
when conducting research into Egyptian
trade unions. When his body was found on 3
February, a police official told Egyptian media
that Giulio Regeni had died in a traffic
accident, but autopsies concluded that he
had been tortured. On 24 March, two weeks
after the European Parliament expressed its
concern over the killing, Egypt’s Ministry of
the Interior said the security forces had killed
members of a criminal gang responsible for
Giulio Regeni’s death. On 8 April, Italy
recalled its ambassador from Egypt. On 9
September, Egypt’s Public Prosecutor said
the security forces had briefly investigated
Giulio Regeni before his disappearance
and murder.
Several states continued to supply Egypt
with arms and military and security
equipment, including jet fighters and
armoured vehicles.
The government kept the Rafah crossing
to the Gaza Strip closed for all but 46 days of
the year, according to the available figures
from the UN Relief and Works Agency.
146
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
The armed forces continued operations
against armed groups active in North Sinai,
using armoured vehicles, artillery and air
strikes. The Ministry of Defence said each of
these operations killed dozens of “terrorists”.
Much of the area remained under a state of
emergency and effectively off-limits to
independent human rights monitors and
journalists.
Armed groups launched repeated and
deadly attacks targeting the security forces as
well as government and judicial officials and
other civilians. Most such attacks occurred in
North Sinai, although bombings and
shootings by armed groups were reported in
other parts of the country. The armed group
calling itself Sinai Province, which had
declared allegiance to the armed group
Islamic State (IS), said it carried out many of
the attacks. During the year, Sinai Province
said it executed several men it claimed were
spies for the security forces.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities severely restricted the rights
to freedoms of expression, association and
peaceful assembly in law and practice.
Journalists, activists and others faced
arrest, prosecution and imprisonment on
charges that included inciting or participating
in protests, disseminating “false rumours”,
defaming officials and damaging morality.
Photojournalist Mahmoud Abou Zeid,
known as Shawkan, and more than 730 other
people, continued to face hearings in a mass,
unfair trial that began in December 2015.
Mahmoud Abou Zeid faced trumped-up
charges that included “joining a criminal
gang” and murder for documenting a sit-in
protest in the capital, Cairo, on 14 August
2013. The court tried many in their absence.
On 1 May, security forces raided the Press
Syndicate in Cairo and arrested journalists
Amro Badr and Mahmoud al-Saqqa on
charges that included inciting protests and
publishing “false rumours”. The Syndicate
condemned the raid and the arrests. A court
Amnesty International Report 2016/17bailed Amro Badr on 28 August and
Mahmoud al-Saqqa on 1 October. On 19
November, a court sentenced Syndicate head
Yahia Galash and board members Khaled
Elbalshy and Gamal Abd el-Reheem to two
years in prison on charges that included
“harbouring suspects”. The court set a fee of
10,000 Egyptian Pounds (US$630) to
suspend the sentences.
Investigative judges stepped up a criminal
investigation into the activities and funding of
NGOs, questioning staff, banning 12
defenders from travelling and freezing the
assets of seven defenders and six groups.
The authorities ordered the closure of one
human rights organization. Parliament
approved new legislation to replace the Law
on Associations (Law 84 of 2002) which
would severely restrict NGOs’ activities and
their right to obtain legal registration and
access to funding from abroad. The draft law
had not been enacted by the end of the year.
On 17 February, officials from the Ministry
of Health served El Nadeem Center for
Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence with a
closure order. The organization continued to
operate and challenged the government’s
decision before the courts, but the authorities
briefly froze its assets in November.
On 17 September, a court in Cairo upheld
an asset freeze against five human rights
defenders and three organizations – the Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies, the
Hisham Mubarak Law Center and the
Egyptian Center for the Right to Education –
which had been ordered by judges
investigating their activities and funding.
The security forces used tear gas to
disperse peaceful protests in Cairo on 15 and
25 April and arrested around 1,300 people
on charges of breaching the Protest Law (Law
107 of 2013) and the Law on Assembly (Law
10 of 1914). On 8 June the government
announced that it planned to amend the
Protest Law; it had not submitted any drafts
to parliament by the end of the year.
On 3 December the Supreme
Constitutional Court ruled that an article of
the Protest Law was unconstitutional. The
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
article gave the Ministry of the Interior powers
to ban protests arbitrarily.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Police officers continued to use excessive
lethal force following verbal altercations,
shooting and killing at least 11 people and
injuring more than 40 others. Courts jailed
two police officers for 25 years in separate
cases of fatal shootings which had led to
neighbourhood protests.
The Ministry of the Interior repeatedly
announced that security forces had shot
dead suspects during raids on residences,
including members of the Muslim
Brotherhood and alleged members of armed
groups. No police officers were formally
investigated, raising concern that security
forces may have used excessive force or in
some cases carried out extrajudicial
executions.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Critics and opponents of the government
continued to face arbitrary arrest and
detention on charges that included inciting
protests, “terrorism” and belonging to
banned groups such as the Muslim
Brotherhood or the 6 April Youth Movement.
The authorities also arbitrarily detained
several human rights defenders.
The security forces arrested around 1,300
people across Egypt between mid-April and
early May in attempts to quell protests,
according to estimates by a coalition of
Egyptian human rights lawyers. Most were
released, but some subsequently faced trial
(see below, “Unfair trials”).
More than 1,400 individuals were held
beyond the two-year legal limit for pre-trial
detention without being referred to trial.
Mahmoud Mohamed Ahmed Hussein was
released on bail on 25 March by court order
after more than two years’ detention without
trial for wearing a T-shirt with the slogan
“Nation without Torture” and a scarf bearing
the “25 January Revolution” logo.
Malek Adly, a director at the Egyptian
Center for Economic and Social Rights, was
arrested by security forces on 5 May on
147charges of spreading “false rumours” and
attempting to overthrow the government. He
had helped to file a lawsuit challenging the
government’s decision to cede the islands of
Tiran and Sanafir to Saudi Arabia. A court
ordered his release on 28 August.
Security forces arrested the chair of the
Egyptian Commission for Rights and
Freedoms, Ahmed Abdallah, on 25 April and
the group’s minorities’ director, Mina Thabet,
on 19 May. The organization had
documented enforced disappearances in
Egypt. Both men were remanded in custody
but were not formally charged and were
released on bail on 18 June and 10
September respectively.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The NSA abducted hundreds of people
without judicial order and held them
incommunicado for prolonged periods,
outside of judicial oversight and without
access to family members or legal
representation. 1 The authorities continued to
deny that such enforced disappearances
occurred. The security forces targeted
suspected supporters of the Muslim
Brotherhood and activists with other political
affiliations. Some enforced disappearances
were carried out by Military Intelligence
officials.
The NSA detained 14-year-old Aser
Mohamed on 12 January and subjected him
to enforced disappearance for 34 days. He
said NSA interrogators forced him to
“confess” under torture to “terrorism”-related
charges, and that a prosecutor threatened
him with further torture if he retracted his
confession. His trial was ongoing at the end
of the year.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Security officials subjected detainees to
beatings and ill-treatment upon arrest. NSA
interrogators tortured and otherwise ill-treated
many victims of enforced disappearance to
extract “confessions” for use against them at
trial. Methods included severe beatings,
electric shocks and being forced to adopt
stress positions. Egyptian human rights
148
groups documented dozens of reports of
deaths in custody due to torture and other ill-
treatment and inadequate access to
medical care.
On 20 September, a court sentenced nine
police officers to three-year prison sentences
for assaulting doctors at a hospital in the
Cairo district of Matariya in January. The
court released the officers on bail pending
an appeal.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Criminal courts continued to conduct mass
unfair trials involving dozens – sometimes
hundreds – of defendants on charges of
participating in protests and political violence
following the ousting of Mohamed Morsi as
president in July 2013.
In some trials involving defendants who
had been subjected to enforced
disappearance, courts accepted
“confessions” obtained through torture
as evidence.
In addition to dedicated “circuits” (special
courts) for terrorism-related trials, military
courts unfairly tried hundreds of civilians,
including in mass trials. In August the
authorities extended a law vastly expanding
the jurisdiction of military courts to include
crimes committed against “public
installations” for a further five years.
Courts tried more than 200 people on
charges of taking part in protests against the
government’s decision to cede the islands of
Tiran and Sanafir to Saudi Arabia, sentencing
many to prison terms of between two to five
years and heavy fines. Appeals courts
subsequently overturned most prison
sentences.
More than 490 people, including Irish
national Ibrahim Halawa, faced charges of
participating in violence during a protest in
August 2013, in a mass trial which opened in
2014. The charges against Ibrahim Halawa
were considered by Amnesty International to
be trumped up.
On 18 June, a court sentenced ousted
president Mohamed Morsi to 25 years in
prison for leading a “banned group” and a
further 15 years for stealing classified
Amnesty International Report 2016/17information. The court sentenced six other
men to death in the case, including three
journalists in their absence.
IMPUNITY
The authorities failed to adequately
investigate the vast majority of alleged human
rights violations, including torture and other
ill-treatment, enforced disappearances,
deaths in custody and the widespread use of
excessive force by security forces since
2011, and to bring perpetrators to justice.
Prosecutors regularly refused to investigate
detainees’ complaints of torture and other ill-
treatment, as well as evidence that security
forces had falsified dates of arrest in cases of
enforced disappearances.
On 15 August, President al-Sisi signed
amendments to the Police Authority Law
which prohibited security forces from “ill-
treating citizens” and prohibited officers from
making unauthorized statements to the
media and unionizing.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face inadequate
protection from sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as gender discrimination in
law and practice, particularly under personal
status laws regulating divorce.
A 17-year-old girl died on 29 May,
reportedly from haemorrhaging, following
female genital mutilation (FGM) at a private
hospital in Suez Governorate. Four people
faced trial on charges of causing lethal injury
and FGM, including the girl’s mother and
medical staff.
On 25 September, President al-Sisi signed
a law increasing the prison sentence for any
individual who carries out FGM, from a
minimum of three months and maximum of
two years, to a minimum of five years and a
maximum of 15 years, also punishing those
who force girls to undergo FGM.
DISCRIMINATION – RELIGIOUS
MINORITIES
Religious minorities, including Coptic
Christians, Shi’a Muslims and Baha’is,
continued to face discriminatory restrictions
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
in law and practice and inadequate
protection from violence.
There were repeated attacks targeting
Coptic Christians. On 11 December a bomb
attack on a church in Cairo killed 27 people.
The armed group IS claimed responsibility,
while the authorities blamed a “terrorism
cell” linked to the Muslim Brotherhood.
A new law regulating churches, signed
by President al-Sisi on 28 September,
arbitrarily restricted their construction, repair
and expansion.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Individuals continued to face arrest,
detention and trial on “debauchery” charges
under Law 10 of 1961, on the basis of their
real or perceived sexual orientation and
gender identity.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Egyptian security forces arrested more than
4,600 refugees, asylum-seekers and
migrants as they attempted to cross the
Mediterranean Sea to Europe, according to
figures published by UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, in September.
On 8 November, President al-Sisi signed a
law which would punish those who illegally
transfer people from one country to another
with a fine of up to 500,000 Egyptian Pounds
(US$32,130) and prison terms of up to 25
years. The law did not distinguish between
human smuggling and trafficking. While the
law exempted victims of trafficking and
irregular migrants from prison sentences and
fines, it provided that the government should
return them to their countries of origin –
potentially against their will. The law did not
specify how the authorities should treat
victims of trafficking and refugees and
asylum-seekers and whether they would be
protected from refoulement.
On 22 September, a boat carrying
refugees, asylum-seekers and irregular
migrants capsized off the Egyptian coast,
resulting in the deaths of more than 200
people. Security forces arrested the crew.
149WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The authorities did not recognize
independent trade unions operating outside
of the state-controlled Egyptian Trade Union
Federation. This was reflected in a new draft
labour law which tightened central control on
unions.
A military court unfairly tried 26 civilian
workers at Alexandria Shipyard Company for
striking.
Egyptian human rights organizations
repeatedly warned that the government was
not doing enough to ensure that its economic
policies, including subsidy reform and
currency devaluation, as well as proposed
reforms to the civil service law, did not
negatively affect people on lower incomes
and those living in poverty.
DEATH PENALTY
Criminal courts continued to hand down
death sentences for murder, rape, drugs
trafficking, armed robbery and “terrorism”.
People were executed for murder and other
criminal offences.
The Court of Cassation overturned some
death sentences and referred cases for
retrial, including a death sentence against
ousted president Mohamed Morsi and at
least one case of a mass unfair trial linked to
the 2013 unrest.
Military courts handed down death
sentences against civilians following grossly
unfair trials marred by enforced
disappearances and torture and other ill-
treatment.
On 29 May a military court sentenced six
civilian men to death and 12 civilian men to
prison sentences of 15 to 25 years on
charges of belonging to the Muslim
Brotherhood, obtaining classified information
and possessing firearms and explosives. The
court ignored the men’s complaints of torture
and other ill-treatment, as well as evidence
that security forces had subjected them to
enforced disappearance following their
arrests in May and June 2015. The court also
sentenced two other men to death and six to
25-year prison terms in their absence. The
150
detainees were appealing the judgment
before a higher military court.
1. Egypt: ‘Officially, you do not exist’ – disappeared and tortured in the
name of counter-terrorism (MDE 12/4368/2016)
EL SALVADOR
Republic of El Salvador
Head of state and government: Salvador Sánchez
Cerén
Increasing levels of violence continued to
affect people’s rights to life, physical
integrity, education and freedom of
movement. There were reports of excessive
use of force by the security forces and of a
surge in asylum applications by Salvadorans
in various countries in the region. A total
ban on abortion threatened women’s rights.
However, a proposal to decriminalize
abortion in certain specific circumstances
was before the Legislative Assembly at the
end of the year. A human rights defender
was tried on charges of slander and
defamation. The Supreme Court declared
the 1993 Amnesty Law unconstitutional.
Impunity for violence and other crimes
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) people persisted.
BACKGROUND
Levels of violence and other crimes, primarily
resulting from gang activity, continued to
ravage the country, with 3,438 homicides
reported in the first six months of the year;
the equivalent figure for 2015 was 3,335.
The press also reported sexual violence
against women and girls by gang members.
In April, the authorities approved a series
of “extraordinary measures” to try to stem the
wave of violence afflicting the country,
including legal reforms to introduce stricter
prison regimes and the creation of a
specialized reaction force of 1,000 police and
military personnel to combat criminal gangs.
Critics raised concerns that the use of the
military in public security operations could
Amnesty International Report 2016/17result in human rights violations, according to
media reports. women were killed; the equivalent figure for
2015 was 249, according to official records.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE AND
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Members of the security forces were accused
of human rights violations during operations
to combat organized crime. In April, the
Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman
reported that both the police and the military
had used excessive force and committed
extrajudicial killings while carrying out two
security operations in 2015. The
Ombudsman was also reported in the press
as stating that other similar cases were under
investigation.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Threats to women’s rights persisted. The total
ban on abortion remained in place even for
cases of rape or where there is a risk to the
life of the woman.
In May, María Teresa Rivera was released
after spending four years in prison, convicted
of aggravated homicide after having a
miscarriage. The judge released María Teresa
Rivera after reviewing her sentence and ruled
that there was insufficient evidence to
support the charges against her. 1 More than
20 women remained in prison serving lengthy
sentences after suffering pregnancy-related
complications or obstetric emergencies.
In July, a new proposal filed by a group of
parliamentarians from the main opposition
party, the Nationalist Republican Alliance
(ARENA), sought to increase prison terms
from a maximum of eight years to up to a
maximum of 50 years for having an abortion.
The reform had not been approved by the
end of the year. 2
In October, parliamentarians belonging to
the ruling Farabundo Martί National
Liberation Front (FMLN) put forward a
proposal to decriminalize abortion in four
circumstances, including when a woman’s
life is at risk or when the pregnancy is a
consequence of rape. The proposal remained
pending at the end of the year.
There were high levels of gender-based
violence. In the period January to July, 338
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
In August, human rights defender Sonia
Sánchez Pérez was acquitted of all charges.
Her trial resulted from a lawsuit filed by a
private company accusing her of slander and
defamation because of her statements about
the environmental impact of the company’s
infrastructure project on her community. She
had also denounced threats against her by
private security personnel. The company filed
an appeal against the decision.
MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Many of those who sought to leave the
country were fleeing the effects of the
increasing control of criminal gangs over
areas of the country and the impact this
had on the rights to life, physical integrity,
education and freedom of movement of
local populations.
LGBTI people were frequently targeted for
abuse, intimidation and violence because of
their sexual orientation and/or their gender
identity. In particular, transgender women,
who often face greater obstacles in accessing
justice because of discrimination, were
subjected to violence and extortion by gangs.
Unable to seek protection or justice, some
LGBTI people fled the country as the only
way to escape the violence.
Deportations of Salvadorans, especially
from Mexico, increased. However, El Salvador
did not put in place an effective protocol or
mechanism to identify and protect those who
were forcibly returned to the communities
from which they had fled. 3
IMPUNITY
El Salvador acceded to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court in March.
In June, a monitoring compliance hearing
relating to two cases of enforced
disappearance committed during the armed
conflict took place before the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights. In September, the
Court rendered a judgment in one of the
cases, Contreras et al v El Salvador, and
151requested that the state provide detailed and
updated information about the criminal
investigations and all the efforts made to
identify and bring to justice those suspected
of criminal responsibility for crimes under
international law and human rights violations.
In July, the Supreme Court declared the
1993 Amnesty Law unconstitutional, an
important step forward for victims of past
human rights violations seeking justice. 4
Four military officers who were the subject
of a 2011 arrest warrant issued by a Spanish
judge for their involvement in the 1989 killing
of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and
her daughter were reportedly arrested in
February. However, according to press
reports, the Supreme Court denied the
extradition request in August.
In September, a court ordered the
reopening of the El Mozote case in which
hundreds of civilians were executed by
military officials in December 1981.
During 2016, two former military officers
who served as ministers of defence during
the armed conflict were deported from the
USA to El Salvador accused of human rights
violations committed during the 1980s. 5
The rights to freedom of expression and of
peaceful assembly were severely curtailed
ahead of presidential elections in April.
Police used excessive force including
firearms against members of opposition
parties. Hundreds of political opponents
and others, including foreign nationals,
were arbitrarily arrested and held without
charge or trial for varying periods; several
were tortured.
BACKGROUND
In April, incumbent President Obiang won
the presidential elections with 93.7% of the
votes cast. There were reports of electoral
fraud and numerous human rights violations
prior to the elections. Independent political
opposition parties boycotted the compilation
of the electoral register and the elections on
the grounds that both contravened electoral
law.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
2. El Salvador: Scandalous proposal to increase jail terms for women
accused of abortion (Press release, 12 July) The right to freedom of expression was
suppressed. In January, police in Bata
arbitrarily arrested Convergence for Social
Democracy members Anselmo Santos Ekoo
and Urbano Elo Ntutum, for “disturbing the
peace”, as they distributed leaflets and
announced a meeting of their opposition
party. They were released without charge 10
days later.
3. Americas: Home sweet home? Honduras, Guatemala and El
Salvador’s role in a deepening refugee crisis (AMR 01/4865/2016) FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
1. El Salvador: Release of woman jailed after miscarriage, a victory for
human rights (Press release, 20 May)
4. El Salvador rejects Amnesty Law in historic ruling (News story, 14
July)
5. El Salvador debe abolir la Ley de Amnistía y enfrentar su sangriento
pasado (News story, 14 January)
EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
Republic of Equatorial Guinea
Head of state and government: Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo
152
Between February and May, over 250 people
were arrested for attending opposition parties’
meetings. All but four of those arrested were
released without charge after being held for
over a week. Members and sympathizers of
the opposition party Citizens for Innovation
(CI) were particularly targeted, as were
relatives of the party’s Secretary-General,
Gabriel Nze. Taxi drivers taking people to
meetings were also arrested.
On 28 February, plain clothes security
personnel disrupted a CI meeting in Bata. CI
members Leopoldo Obama Ndong, Manuel
Esono Mia, Federico Nguema, Santiago
Mangue Ndong and Jesús Nze Ndong were
arrested and remained in detention without
Amnesty International Report 2016/17charge at the end of the year. Over 40 others
were arrested over the following days in Bata,
and at least 10 others in other towns.
In April, four days before the elections,
some 140 people were arrested at Bata
airport as they welcomed CI’s Secretary-
General. Others were arrested later in their
homes; they included Gabriel Nze’s sister
and elder brother. Some detainees were held
at Bata police station and others in Bata
prison. All were released without charge over
a week later. Several were tortured and
otherwise ill-treated, including a man who
was made to lie on the floor while soldiers
jumped on his hands.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 22 April, police used excessive force
against CI members who had gathered
peacefully in the party’s headquarters in
Malabo. At about 4am, police in helicopters
and armed vehicles surrounded the
headquarters and used tear gas and live
ammunition to force the approximately 200
party members out of the building. Four
people were injured by bullets and taken to
hospital over 24 hours later, following the
intervention of the US Ambassador. At least
23 people were arrested and taken to Black
Beach prison where they were beaten. All
were released without charge on 30 April.
The police siege of the CI’s headquarters
continued until 4 May.
ARBITRARY ARREST AND DETENTIONS
In February, police arbitrarily arrested Ernesto
Mabale Eyang and Juan Antonio Mosuy
Eseng, respectively the son and nephew of
the Secretary-General of the party Coalition of
the Opposition for the Restoration of a
Democratic State. Juan Antonio Mosuy Eseng
emailed his cousin a document allegedly
signed by the Minister of National Security
ordering the arrest of exiled politicians. The
document had been published online the
previous day. After a week at Malabo Central
police station, they were transferred to Black
Beach prison where they remained without
charge or trial and without access to their
lawyer for several months. The Malabo
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
investigating court did not respond to a
habeas corpus application issued by their
lawyer in March. However, in June, the
investigating judge demanded a bribe of 10
million CFA francs (€15,000) to release the
two men. In late November, they were
formally charged, tried and convicted of
revealing state secrets and sentenced to six
months’ imprisonment each, and were
released as, by then, they had already been
imprisoned for nine months.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In July, the Ministry of Education issued an
order calling for the expulsion of pregnant
girls from school, justified by the Vice-
Minister of Education as a means to reduce
adolescent pregnancies. The measures came
into force on 19 September, the start of the
school year.
ERITREA
State of Eritrea
Head of state and government: Isaias Afwerki
Thousands continued to leave the country,
many fleeing the indefinite national service.
The right of people to leave the country
continued to be restricted. Restrictions on
the right to freedom of expression and of
religion remained. The security forces
carried out unlawful killings. Arbitrary
detention without charge or trial continued
to be the norm for thousands of prisoners of
conscience.
BACKGROUND
The change of currency affected the
livelihood of families. Under government
regulations, withdrawals from individuals’
bank accounts were limited to 5000 nakfa
(US$290) a month.
Between 12 and 14 June, armed clashes
erupted between the Eritrean and the
Ethiopian military. Hundreds of combatants
were reported to have been killed. Both
governments blamed each other for
153provoking the conflict. Relations between the
two countries have remained tense since
Ethiopia requested negotiations in advance of
the implementation of the Ethiopia/Eritrea
Boundary Commission’s decision.
FORCED LABOUR – NATIONAL SERVICE
The mandatory national service continued to
be extended indefinitely despite the
government’s promise in 2014 to end the
system of unlimited service. Significant
numbers of national service conscripts
remained in open-ended conscription, some
for as long as 20 years. Although under the
law the minimum conscription age was 18, in
practice children continued to be subjected
to military training under the requirement that
they undergo grade 12 of secondary school
at the Sawa National Service training camp.
There they faced harsh living conditions,
military-style discipline and weapons training.
Of 14,000 people who graduated from the
camp in July, 48% were women who
experienced particularly harsh treatment,
including sexual enslavement, torture and
other sexual abuse.
Conscripts were paid low wages and had
limited and arbitrarily granted leave
allowances which, in many cases, disrupted
family life. They served in the defence forces
and were assigned to agriculture,
construction, teaching, the civil service and
other roles. There was no provision for
conscientious objection.
Older people continued to be conscripted
into the “People’s Army”, where they were
given a weapon and assigned duties under
threat of punitive repercussions. Men of up to
67 years of age were conscripted.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
The right of people to leave the country was
restricted. The authorities continued to
prohibit those aged between five and 50
years from travelling abroad and anyone
attempting to leave through borders was
subject to arbitrary detention. People seeking
to leave for family reunification abroad were
forced to travel via land borders in order to
take flights from other countries. If caught by
154
the military en route, they were detained
without charge until they paid exorbitant
fines. The amount payable depended on
factors such as the commanding officer
making the arrest and the time of the year.
People caught during national holidays to
commemorate independence were subject to
higher fines. The amount was greater for
those attempting to cross the border with
Ethiopia. A “shoot-to-kill” policy remained in
place for anyone evading capture and
attempting to cross the border into Ethiopia.
Children close to conscription age caught
trying to leave were sent to Sawa National
Service training camp.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Members of the security forces shot and
killed at least 11 people in the capital,
Asmara, in April. The killings took place when
several national service conscripts tried to
escape while they were being transported in
an army truck. In addition to the conscripts,
bystanders were also killed, according to
reports. The killings had not been
investigated by the end of the year.
PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE
Thousands of prisoners of conscience and
political prisoners, including former
politicians, journalists and practitioners of
unauthorized religions, continued to be
detained without charge or trial and lacked
access to lawyers or family members. Many
had been detained for well over a decade.
In June, the Foreign Minister announced
that 21 politicians and journalists who were
arrested in September 2001, were alive and
would be tried “when the government
decides”. He refused to disclose to their
families the prisoners’ whereabouts or the
state of their health. 1 They were detained
after they published an open letter to the
government and President Afwerki calling for
reform and “democratic dialogue”. Eleven of
them were former members of the Central
Council of the ruling party People’s Front for
Democracy and Justice. They remained
detained without trial at the end of the year.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Thousands of Eritreans continued to flee the
country. UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
registered 17,147 asylum-seekers in 44
countries between January and July alone.
They faced serious human rights abuses
while in transit and in destination countries.
In one incident in May, Sudan deported
hundreds of migrants to Eritrea after arresting
them en route to the Libyan border. Eritreans
also risked arbitrary detention, abduction,
sexual abuse and ill-treatment on their way to
Europe.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
The UN-mandated Commission of Inquiry on
Human Rights in Eritrea submitted its
findings to the UN Human Rights Council in
June. It concluded that the Eritrean
authorities were responsible for crimes
against humanity committed since the
country’s independence in 1991 including
enslavement, enforced disappearance,
arbitrary detention, torture, rape and murder.
1. Eritrea: Immediately and unconditionally release prisoners of
conscience (News story, 21 June)
ESTONIA
Republic of Estonia
Head of state: Kersti Kaljulaid (replaced Toomas
Hendrik Ilves in October)
Head of government: Jüri Ratas (replaced Taavi Rõivas
in November)
Amendments to the Citizenship Law aimed
at reducing statelessness among children
came into force in January, although it did
not include those aged 16 to 18. The
number of asylum applications
remained low.
On 1 January, amendments to the
Citizenship Law came into force. These allow
children born to stateless parents to acquire
Estonian citizenship at birth automatically
without application by a parent, as was
required previously. They also allow children
born in Estonia to hold citizenship of other
countries until age 18. Stateless children
aged under 15 residing in Estonia on 1
January 2016, and whose parents have lived
in the country for at least five years, will also
receive Estonian citizenship. The
amendments did not include children aged
16 to 18 or those born outside the country to
stateless residents of Estonia.
Roma continued to suffer discrimination
across a range of economic and social rights,
including lack of equal access to education,
adequate housing and health care. The
failure of the government to collect and
monitor disaggregated socio-economic data
on Roma and other vulnerable groups
hindered its ability to effectively address their
situation.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The number of asylum applications remained
low compared to elsewhere in the EU;
approximately 130 were received in the first
nine months of 2016.
The European Commission criticized the
government for rejecting relocation requests
by asylum-seekers without providing
substantiated reasons or on unjustified
grounds. Concerns were also raised about
the strict conditions families were required to
meet before they could be considered for
relocation under the EU relocation and
resettlement scheme. By the end of the year,
66 people were relocated to Estonia.
In March, the government approved new
regulations allowing a 90km fence to be built
along its eastern border with Russia.
DISCRIMINATION – ETHNIC MINORITIES RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
As of December, 79,597 people resident in
Estonia remained stateless – almost 6% of
the population. The vast majority were
Russian speakers. On 1 January, the Cohabitation Act came into
force, allowing unmarried, including same-
sex, couples to register their cohabitation and
have access to state benefits.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
155ETHIOPIA After the state of emergency was declared
in October, protests subsided but human
rights violations increased. 1
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Head of state: Mulatu Teshome Wirtu
Head of government: Hailemariam Desalegn EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Prolonged protests over political, economic,
social and cultural grievances were met
with excessive and lethal force by police.
The crackdown on the political opposition
saw mass arbitrary arrests, torture and other
ill-treatment, unfair trials and violations of
the rights to freedom of expression and
association. On 9 October, the government
announced a state of emergency, which led
to further human rights violations.
BACKGROUND
In response to sustained protests in Oromia
and Amhara regional states, the authorities
introduced reforms. However, these failed to
address the protesters’ grievances, including
those relating to: economic, social and
cultural rights; respect for the rule of law; and
the release of prisoners of conscience.
Protests in Oromia that began in
November 2015 against the Addis Ababa
Master Plan, which would have expanded the
capital at the expense of land owned by
Oromo farmers, continued even after the
government cancelled the plan in January.
In late July, people in Amhara region
protested against the arbitrary arrest of
members of the Wolqait Identity Amhara Self-
Determination Committee and demanded
additional regional autonomy in accordance
with the Constitution. There was also a series
of protests for greater administrative
autonomy by the Konso community in
Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples
Region.
After at least 55 people were killed during
a stampede during the Oromo religious
festival of Irrecha on 2 October, allegedly
caused by heavy-handed policing, activists
declared a “week of rage”. Some
demonstrations turned violent, with protesters
burning and demolishing businesses and
government buildings.
156
The security forces used excessive and lethal
force against protesters. By the end of the
year, the security forces had killed at least
800 people since the protests began in
November 2015. 2
On 6 and 7 August, for example, when an
open call to protest was made in Addis
Ababa, government forces killed at least 100
people. More than 1,000 protesters were
arrested and taken to Awash Arba military
base, where they were beaten and forced to
do strenuous exercise in hot weather.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
The crackdown on human rights defenders,
independent media, journalists, bloggers,
peaceful protesters as well as members and
leaders of the political opposition intensified
during the year, often using provisions of the
2009 Anti-Terrorism Proclamation (ATP). 3
The declaration of the state of emergency
signalled further restrictions on freedom of
expression, including intermittent blocking of
the internet.
Under the state of emergency, more than
11,000 people were arrested and detained
without access to a lawyer, their family or a
judge. Among those arbitrarily arrested were
Befeqadu Hailu, a member of the Zone-9
blogging group; Merera Gudina, Chair of the
Oromo Federalist Congress (OFC); Anania
Sorri and Daniel Shibeshi, members of the
former Unity for Democracy and Justice Party
(Andinet); and Elias Gebru, a journalist. Four
members of the national NGO, the Ethiopian
Human Rights Council – Addisu Teferi,
Feqadu Negeri, Roman Waqweya and Bulti
Tessema – were arrested in Neqmte, Oromia.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Political activists faced unfair trials on
charges brought under the ATP, which
includes overly broad and vague definitions
Amnesty International Report 2016/17of terrorist acts punishable by up to 20 years
in prison.
Political opposition leaders Gurmesa Ayano
and Beqele Gerba, Deputy Chief of the OFC,
were among 22 defendants who faced an
unfair trial on charges brought under the ATP
for their role in organizing the November
2015 Oromia protest. On 11 May, when they
were due in court, the authorities refused to
take them there because they were wearing
black suits in mourning for people killed
during the protests. For their next court
appearance on 3 June, prison officials
brought the defendants to court in their
underpants. The defendants complained in
court that they had been beaten in detention
and that prison officials had taken away their
clothes. The court did not order an
investigation into their allegations of torture
and other ill-treatment. 4
Desta Dinka, Youth Coordinator for the
OFC, was held in pre-trial detention from 23
December 2015 until May, before he was
charged under the ATP. The court ordered
his detention pending trial. The law only
allows up to four months of pre-trial
detention.
Berhanu Tekleyared, Eyerusalem Tesfaw
and Fikremariam Asmamaw were denied
their right to present a defence during their
trial on terrorism-related charges. Despite
this, on 20 July they were found guilty.
IMPUNITY
The government rejected calls by the
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, and the
African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights for independent and impartial
investigations of human rights violations
committed in the context of protests in
various regional states.
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
The Liyu police, a special force in Somali
Regional State in eastern Ethiopia,
extrajudicially executed 21 people in Jamaa
Dhuubed on 5 June. Fourteen were shot in
the village’s mosque; seven were shot
elsewhere in the village. When relatives of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
those killed arrived to mourn and bury the
dead, the Liyu police threatened to kill them.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTIONS
On 30 June, the government forcibly evicted
at least 3,000 residents deemed to be
“squatters” in Lafto Sub-City, Addis Ababa.
The residents were apparently offered no
prior consultation or alternative housing and
were given only three days’ notice of eviction.
While the residents were meeting the local
administration to complain, the government
taskforce started to demolish their houses.
The situation turned violent, resulting in the
death of the District Administrator and two
police officers. The police arrested all the
male residents and completed the demolition
in subsequent days.
ABDUCTION OF CHILDREN
The authorities failed to protect adequately
people in Gambella Regional State from
repeated attacks by armed members of
Murle ethnic group based in neighbouring
South Sudan, during which hundreds of
children were abducted. In February and
March, Murle fighters abducted a total of 26
Anuwa children. In one incident on the night
of 15 April, they attacked 13 Nuer villages in
Jikaw and Lare districts in Gambella, killing
208 people and abducting 159 children.
Ethiopian forces had rescued 91 abducted
children by June.
1. Ethiopia: Draconian measures will escalate the deepening crisis
(News story, 18 October)
2. Ethiopia: After a year of protests, time to address grave human rights
concerns (News story, 9 November)
3. Ethiopia: End use of counter-terrorism law to persecute dissenters
and opposition members (News story, 2 June)
4. Ethiopia: Detainees beaten and forced to appear before court
inadequately dressed (News story, 3 June)
FIJI
Republic of Fiji
Head of state: Jioji Konousi Konrote
Head of government: Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama
157In March, Fiji ratified the UN Convention
against Torture although reservations were
made, including on the definition of torture.
Accountability for torture and other ill-
treatment was hindered by immunities
enshrined in the Constitution and a lack of
political will to effectively prosecute cases.
Arbitrary restrictions on the right to freedom
of expression remained. Lack of disaster
response plans resulted in poorly co-
ordinated, delayed or inequitable
distribution of aid following Cyclone
Winston.
BACKGROUND
On 20 and 21 February, Cyclone Winston hit
Fiji, causing 43 deaths and resulting in
62,000 people displaced from their homes.
Lack of infrastructure, geographical
remoteness, discrimination and poor co-
ordination of aid distribution hindered efforts
to reach those most in need. Shortage of
building materials meant that many people
remained homeless six months later, without
access to adequate housing.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
In June, Indigenous parliamentarian Tupou
Draunidalo was suspended for highlighting in
Parliament the continued attempt to silence
government critics. On 7 September a three-
day meeting in Pacific Harbour on the sugar
industry was cancelled by officials who said
that the civil society organizers did not have a
permit. On 10 September, five people,
including politicians, a union leader and an
academic, were arrested and detained in
Suva for up to two days for holding a meeting
to discuss the Constitution without a permit.
Permits are not required in law for
private meetings.
Arbitrary restrictions remained which
curtailed the right to freedom of expression,
and the media in particular. Journalists and
others were subject to harsh fines and
imprisonment under the Constitution and
various laws for exercising their rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.
158
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Three police officers and two military officers
were arrested and charged in November
2015 with the sexual assault of Iowane
Benedito, who was tortured in 2012 (also
known as the YouTube case). The police
officers remained on bail pending hearing at
the end of 2016.
In November, eight police officers and one
military officer were convicted of the rape of
robbery suspect Vilikesa Soko in 2014 but no
one was held to account for causing
his death.
Rajneel Singh, who was kidnapped,
beaten and burned in November 2015 after
handing emails to the police, which allegedly
disclosed unlawful activities, was again
assaulted in his home on 30 August by men
in police uniforms. 1 The police only
responded to his complaint after it had
received media attention.
DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
AND CLIMATE CHANGE
The devastating impact of Cyclone Winston
highlighted the vulnerability of Fiji to natural
disasters and climate change and their
significant impact on human rights. Concerns
were raised about the discriminatory
distribution of aid during the disaster and the
failure to integrate the specific needs of
groups such as women, children and people
with disabilities into relief efforts. A significant
number of people remained homeless or in
temporary shelters, six months on from the
cyclone.
1. Fiji: Whistleblower attacked by men in uniform (News story, 1
September)
FINLAND
Republic of Finland
Head of state: Sauli Niinistö
Head of government: Juha Sipilä
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Changes to the asylum procedure affected
asylum-seekers negatively. Support services
for women who experienced domestic
violence remained inadequate. Legislation
on legal gender recognition continued to
violate the rights of transgender people.
Draft constitutional changes limiting the
right to privacy were proposed.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In September, the right to free legal
representation in the asylum interview during
the asylum procedure was restricted, limiting
it to applicants with exceptional grounds for
assistance. Deadlines for appeals were
reduced from 30 days to 21 days in the
second instance, and to 14 days in the third
instance. The changes increased the
likelihood of asylum-seekers being forcibly
returned to countries where they might be at
risk of human rights violations (refoulement).
Family reunification was restricted to those
who had a secure income, set at an
unreasonably high threshold. Further
administrative restrictions and practical
difficulties with the application procedure
adversely affected the ability of refugees and
other recipients of international protection –
including unaccompanied children – to enjoy
their right to family life.
The authorities continued to detain
unaccompanied children, and families with
children based on their migration status.
There was no time limit on detaining families
with children.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Legislation on legal gender recognition
continued to violate the rights of transgender
individuals. Under the Act on Legal
Recognition of the Gender of Transsexuals
(Trans Act), transgender people could obtain
legal gender recognition only if they agreed to
be sterilized, were diagnosed with a mental
disorder, and were aged over 18.
In April, the National Advisory Board on
Social Welfare and Health Care Ethics raised
concerns that intersex children were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
subjected to unnecessary medical
procedures, without full informed consent.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Services for women who had experienced
violence remained inadequate and under-
resourced and varied significantly between
municipalities. The number of shelters and
their accessibility for women with disabilities
remained inadequate. Neither adequate
walk-in services nor long-term support
services for survivors of violence were in
place. No co-ordinated national network of
support services for survivors of sexual
violence had been set up.
The definition of rape in the Criminal Code
failed to incorporate a lack of consent.
Mediation continued to be used widely in
cases of intimate partner violence.
In September, the Ministry of Social Affairs
and Health prepared a second draft decree
to create a body to co-ordinate work
combating violence against women.
RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In October, a draft constitutional amendment
limiting the right to privacy was published. Its
aim was to enable the acquisition of
information on threats to national security, by
giving military and civilian intelligence
agencies permission to conduct
communications surveillance without any
requirement for a link to a specific criminal
offence.
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
Conscientious objectors to military service
continued to be punished for refusing to
undertake alternative civilian service, which
remained punitive and discriminatory in
length. The duration of alternative civilian
service was 347 days, more than double the
shortest military service period of 165 days.
159FRANCE
French Republic
Head of state: François Hollande
Head of government: Bernard Cazeneuve (replaced
Manuel Valls in December)
In response to several violent attacks, the
state of emergency was extended four times
during the year; emergency measures
restricted human rights disproportionately.
In October, the authorities evicted an
informal settlement at Calais, where more
than 6,500 migrants and asylum-seekers
lived.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Several violent attacks were committed
during the year. On 13 June, a police officer
and his partner were killed in their home in
the Paris Region. On 14 July, 86 people were
killed in Nice by a man who deliberately
drove a truck into the crowd gathered to
celebrate France’s national holiday. On 26
July, a priest was killed in his church near
Rouen in northwestern France.
A week after the attack in Nice, Parliament
voted to renew the state of emergency in
place since co-ordinated terrorist attacks on
Paris in November 2015, until 26 January
2017. On 15 December, Parliament voted to
extend it again until 15 July 2017.
The state of emergency gave the Ministry
of the Interior and police exceptional powers
including the possibility to conduct house
searches with no judicial authorization and to
submit individuals to administrative control
measures to restrict their liberty on grounds
of vague evidence falling below the threshold
required for criminal prosecution. 1
Using these powers, the authorities
conducted more than 4,000 house searches
without judicial authorization and subjected
more than 400 individuals to assigned
residence orders. As of 22 November, the
orders applied to 95 individuals. Emergency
measures disproportionately restricted
freedom of movement and the right to
private life.
160
On 10 June, the UN Committee against
Torture raised concerns regarding allegations
of excessive use of force by police in the
context of administrative searches conducted
using the emergency powers, and called for
investigations into those allegations.
Parliament also passed new legislation
strengthening administrative and judicial
powers in the area of counter-terrorism. On 3
June, Parliament adopted a new law that
granted the Minister of the Interior power to
use administrative control measures against
individuals allegedly returning from conflict
areas who are deemed to constitute a threat
to public security. The law extended the
power of judicial authorities to authorize
house searches at any time for the purposes
of investigating terrorism-related offences.
The law also made the regular consultation
of websites deemed to be inciting or glorifying
terrorism an offence unless those websites
are consulted in good faith, for research
purposes or other professional reasons with
the aim of informing the general public. The
vague definition of the offence increased the
likelihood of the prosecution of individuals for
behaviour that falls within the scope of
legitimate exercise of freedom of expression
and information.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
On 24 October the authorities began the
eviction of more than 6,500 migrants and
asylum-seekers living in the informal
settlement known as “The Jungle” in Calais,
a process that took several days. Migrants
and asylum-seekers were relocated in
reception centres throughout France where
they were given information regarding asylum
procedures. The authorities failed to
genuinely consult migrants and asylum-
seekers or provide them with adequate
information prior to the eviction.
Civil society organizations raised concerns
regarding the process for the approximately
1,600 unaccompanied minors in the camp.
Their situation was to be assessed jointly by
French and UK authorities in view of their
best interests and/or possible transfer to the
UK to be reunited with their family. The
Amnesty International Report 2016/17authorities did not have the capacity to
register all of the minors, and some were
allegedly turned away on the grounds of
presumed age without undergoing a thorough
assessment. On 2 November the UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child raised
concerns over minors in Calais who were left
without adequate shelter, food and medical
services during the eviction operation. As of
mid-November, about 330 minors had been
transferred to the UK.
Due to the lack of reception capacity and
resources to register asylum applications in
the Paris region, more than 3,800 asylum-
seekers lived in degrading conditions and
slept rough for months in the 19th district of
Paris until the authorities transferred them to
reception centres on 3 November.
On 29 November, authorities rejected the
asylum application of a man from the war-
torn region of South Kordofan and forcibly
returned him to Sudan despite the risk of
being persecuted. On 20 November,
authorities released another Sudanese man
from Darfur who was at risk of being
forcibly returned.
The government pledged to accept 6,000
refugees under the EU-Turkey migration
control deal and to resettle 3,000 refugees
from Lebanon.
On 9 December the Council of State, the
highest administrative court, rejected the
decree signed by the Prime Minister in
September 2015 that authorized the
extradition of Moukhtar Abliazov, a Kazakh
citizen, to Russia for financial offences as the
extradition request had been motivated by
political reasons.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Frequent demonstrations took place between
March and September to protest against the
government-backed proposal to reform the
Labour Code, which was adopted in July. A
minority of demonstrators engaged in violent
acts and clashed with police.
Since the fourth renewal of the state of
emergency in July, the authorities were
expressly permitted to ban public
demonstrations by claiming that they were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
unable to ensure public order. Dozens of
demonstrations were banned and hundreds
of individuals were subjected to
administrative measures, restricting their
freedom of movement and preventing them
from attending demonstrations.
On several occasions, police used
excessive force against protesters, including
by using tear gas grenades, charging at them
violently and using rubber bullets and sting
ball grenades that left hundreds injured.
DISCRIMINATION
Roma people continued to be forcibly evicted
from informal settlements without being
genuinely consulted or offered alternative
housing. According to civil society
organizations, 4,615 individuals were forcibly
evicted in the first six months of the year. On
13 July, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights called on the
authorities to provide adequate notice and
information as well as rehousing options to all
those affected by an eviction.
In October, Parliament adopted a law on
legal gender recognition for transgender
people. The law established a procedure
which allows transgender people to seek legal
recognition of their gender without fulfilling
any medical requirements. However, it still
imposes on transgender people some
requirements including a name change
or a physical appearance in line with
gender identity.
Several mayors adopted measures to
restrict the wearing of beachwear deemed
incompatible with hygiene and with the
principles of secularism and maintenance of
public order. In particular, authorities sought
to ban the wearing of full-covering beachwear
also known as the “burkini”. On 26 August,
the Council of State suspended the measure
in Villeneuve-Loubet in southern France,
deeming it not necessary to ensure
public order.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
On 29 November the National Assembly
adopted a bill imposing a duty on certain
large French companies to implement a
161“vigilance plan” to prevent serious human
rights abuses and environmental damage in
relation to their own activities and those of
subsidiaries and other established business
relations, and subjecting them to fines for
non-compliance. In addition, any inadequacy
in the plan which leads to human rights
abuses could be used by victims to claim
damages against the company before a
French court. At the end of the year, the bill
was pending before the Senate.
ARMS TRADE
In June a Palestinian family lodged a
complaint against French company Exxelia
Technologies for complicity in manslaughter
and war crimes in Gaza. In 2014, three of the
family’s sons were killed by a missile fired at
their house in Gaza City by Israeli forces.
According to subsequent investigations, a
component of the missile had been
manufactured by Exxelia Technologies.
France remained the fourth largest arms
exporter in the world, selling to countries
including Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
1. Upturned lives: The disproportionate impact of France’s state of
emergency (EUR 21/3364/2016)
GAMBIA
Islamic Republic of the Gambia
Head of state and government: Yahya Jammeh
Restrictive laws continued to curb the right
to freedom of expression. Peaceful protests
were violently repressed, and arrested
demonstrators were subjected to torture and
other ill-treatment. At least three
government critics died in custody,
including one tortured to death shortly after
arrest. At least five men arrested in 2015
remained subject to enforced
disappearance.
BACKGROUND
Adama Barrow, the opposition coalition
candidate, won presidential elections held on
162
1 December. President Jammeh rejected the
election results on 9 December. On 13
December, security forces evicted the
Independent Electoral Commission chairman
and his staff from their headquarters. On the
same day, President Jammeh’s party, the
Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and
Construction (APRC), filed a challenge to the
election results in the Supreme Court.
Hearing the case would have required
President Jammeh to appoint new judges;
therefore the Gambian Bar Association
described the appeal as “fundamentally
tainted”. His refusal to accept the election
results was widely condemned internationally,
including by the UN Security Council, the AU
and ECOWAS.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Restrictive laws continued to curb the right to
freedom of expression. They included laws
banning criticism of officials, laws prohibiting
the publication of false news and colonial-era
laws on sedition. Journalists operated in a
climate of self-censorship following past
crackdowns on media workers and human
rights defenders.
In December 2015 the UN Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention stated that journalist
Alagie Abdoulie Ceesay, Managing Director of
the independent radio station Teranga FM,
had been arbitrarily deprived of liberty since
his arrest in July 2015 on charges of sedition.
The Working Group called for his immediate
release, compensation and an investigation
by the UN Special Rapporteur on torture.
In April, Alagie Abdoulie Ceesay escaped
from custody.
On 8 November, Momodou Sabally,
Director of the Gambia Radio and Television
Services, and reporter Bakary Fatty, were
arrested by agents from the National
Intelligence Agency (NIA). Bakary Fatty
remained in detention without charge and
with no access to his family or a lawyer.
Momodou Sabally was recharged for various
economic offences which had previously
been dropped in 2015. The two men
appeared to have been arrested after airing
Amnesty International Report 2016/17footage of an opposition candidate’s
nomination.
On 10 November, Alhagie Manka, an
independent photojournalist, and Yunus
Salieu, a journalist at the Observer, were both
arrested after filming supporters of the
President. Yunus Salieu was released without
charge the following day, and
Alhagie Manka was released without charge
on 16 November.
In October, the ECOWAS Community Court
of Justice heard a case brought by the
Federation of African Journalists and four
exiled Gambian journalists, challenging the
draconian press laws and claiming that the
measures adopted in enforcing these laws
violated the rights of journalists, including the
right to freedom from torture.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Peaceful protests were violently repressed
and protesters arrested.
On 14 April, members of the opposition
United Democratic Party (UDP) and youth
groups demonstrated peacefully in
Serrekunda in favour of electoral reform.
Police dispersed the protest violently and
arrested several people. Some of those
arrested were seriously injured and one
man – Solo Sandeng, UDP Organizing
Secretary – died in custody shortly after his
arrest.
Twenty-five of those arrested were
eventually charged and detained in Mile 2
Prison in the capital Banjul. Thirteen were
later released and 12 were moved to
Janjanbureh Prison. On 21 July, 11 people
were convicted of participating in an
unauthorized protest and related offences
and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment.
They were released on bail pending appeal
on 8 December.
On 16 April, UDP members gathered
peacefully in Banjul outside the house of
UDP leader Ousainou Darboe, calling for
justice for Solo Sandeng’s death and the
release of arrested UDP members. Police
fired tear gas at the demonstrators and beat
them with batons. Several UDP executive
members, including Ousainou Darboe, were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
arrested along with other protesters and
bystanders. On 20 July, 19 people, including
Ousainou Darboe, were sentenced to three
years’ imprisonment for participating in an
unauthorized protest and related offences.
They were released on bail pending appeal
on 5 December.
On 9 May, around 40 protesters were
arrested as they made their way towards
Westfield, a suburb of Banjul, after the court
hearing of Ousainou Darboe and others.
Protesters were stopped by the Police
Intervention Unit (PIU) who beat them. Some
protesters threw stones in reaction and
several people, including a PIU officer, were
injured. Fourteen people were on trial at the
end of the year following this protest. Two
women were granted bail in May and the
remaining twelve men were granted bail on
6 December.
Campaign rallies were permitted during
the official two-week election campaign
period before 30 November, with thousands
of Gambians taking part peacefully.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Those arrested during the April protests were
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment.
Among them was businesswoman Nogoi
Njie, who stated in an affidavit filed at the
High Court that she had been beaten with
hosepipes and batons by men wearing black
hoods and gloves while water was poured
over her at the headquarters of the National
Intelligence Agency (NIA) in Banjul. She also
stated that she had seen Solo Sandeng there;
his beaten body was swollen and bleeding
and she feared he was dead.
On 13 June, the authorities admitted in
their response to a habeas corpus application
that Solo Sandeng had died during his arrest
and detention and that an inquiry had been
launched. No further information had been
made publicly available by the end of
the year.
DEATHS IN CUSTODY
On 21 February, trade union leader Sheriff
Dibba, Secretary-General of the Gambian
National Transport Control Association
163(GNTCA), died at a medical facility in Banjul.
He had fallen ill in police custody, but had
not received prompt medical attention.
According to the International Transport
Workers’ Federation (ITF), Sheriff Dibba and
eight other GNTCA leaders had been arrested
after the union called on the authorities to
reduce the price of fuel. The ITF filed a case
against the Gambian government at the
International Labour Organization (ILO)
concerning Sheriff Dibba’s death and the
“punitive measures” taken against the
GNTCA, whose activities were suspended by
presidential order. Sheriff Dibba’s family had
not been given his autopsy results and no
investigation into his death had been initiated
by the end of the year.
On 21 August, Ebrima Solo Krummah, a
senior UDP member arrested on 9 May and
detained at Mile 2 Prison, died after surgery
in hospital. There were allegations that he
had been refused medical care in detention.
No information as to the cause of death was
made public and no inquiry into the death
was announced by the end of the year.
Ousman Jammeh, former Deputy Minister
of Agriculture, also continued to be subject to
enforced disappearance. He was removed
from his post and arrested in October 2015,
and reportedly detained at the NIA
headquarters for several days before being
transferred to Mile 2 Prison. However, neither
his family nor his lawyer had any contact with
him and the authorities provided no
information about his whereabouts or the
reason for his arrest.
Omar Malleh Jabang, a businessman and
opposition supporter, was taken away by men
in plain clothes on 10 November and had not
been seen since, despite requests made to
the authorities.
On 1 September Sarjo Jallow was
dismissed as Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs. From 2 September his family and
lawyers were unable to contact him, although
they were told unofficially that he was
detained at the NIA headquarters. His wife
was a vocal supporter of the UDP. On 10
October lawyers filed an application for his
release from NIA custody; he was not
released by the end of the year.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES,
ARBITRARY DETENTIONS AND
INCOMMUNICADO DETENTION CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Three Imams arrested in 2015 remained
subject to enforced disappearance. Alhagi
Ousman Sawaneh, Imam of Kanifing South,
was arrested on 18 October 2015 by men in
plain clothes. He was reportedly detained
because he had petitioned the President for
the release of Haruna Gassama, President of
the Rice Farmers’ Cooperative Society, who
had at the time been in NIA custody for six
months without charge. Two other Imams –
Sheikh Omar Colley and Imam Gassama –
were arrested in October and November
2015, allegedly for the same reason.
The three Imams were believed to be held
incommunicado in Janjanbureh Prison, but
despite repeated requests from their families
the authorities did not confirm their
whereabouts. On 21 March 2016 the High
Court in Banjul ordered the release of Imam
Sawaneh following a habeas corpus
application, but the court order was ignored. GEORGIA
164
In July, Gambia passed a law banning child
marriage (a marriage of anyone under 18
years old). The offence is punishable by up to
20 years’ imprisonment for any adult involved
in arranging a child marriage, including the
child’s husband and parents. According to
the UN, 40% of women aged 20 to 49 in
Gambia were married before the age of 18,
while 16% married before they turned 15.
Georgia
Head of state: Giorgi Margvelashvili
Head of government: Giorgi Kvirikashvili
Concerns persisted about the lack of
judicial independence and about political
interference following a series of favourable
rulings for the government in high-profile
cases. New cases of torture and other ill-
Amnesty International Report 2016/17treatment by police were reported.
Continuing border fencing along the
administrative boundary lines of the
breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia had further negative impact on
economic and social rights of local
residents.
BACKGROUND
Parliamentary elections on 8 October resulted
in the ruling party – the Georgian Dream –
increasing its majority to 115 seats. The main
opposition party – United National Movement
(UNM) – gained 27 seats and the right-wing
conservative party – Patriot’s Alliance – six.
Secretly recorded private conversations
and intimate activities by opposition figures
and journalists were leaked ahead of
elections. Five people, including a former
security official, were arrested on suspicion of
being responsible for illegally obtaining the
recordings. The investigation was ongoing at
the end of 2016.
De facto authorities and Russian forces in
the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia continued to restrict movement
across the administrative boundary line,
detaining dozens of people: several detainees
complained of torture and other ill-treatment,
including beatings, during the prolonged
arbitrary detentions. On 19 May, a man was
killed by a Russian soldier while trying to
cross into Abkhazia. An investigation into his
death by the de facto authorities was ongoing
at the end of the year.
The increased fencing along the
administrative boundary lines negatively
impacted the rights to work, food and
adequate standard of living of local residents,
after they lost access, partly or completely, to
their orchards, pasture and arable land.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Concerns over the lack of judicial
independence and selective justice were
raised, by both local and international
observers.
On 12 January, the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights reported
that courts were more likely to approve
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
detention or give custodial sentences to
members of the UNM compared with bail
and fines issued to pro-government activists
in comparable cases.
On 16 May, five former senior Ministry of
Defence officials (appointed by former
Minister of Defence Irakli Alasania, who had
since become a key political opposition
figure), were convicted of “misusing” GEL 4.1
million (US$2.1 million) by the Tbilisi City
Court and sentenced to seven years’
imprisonment each. They were found guilty
despite the prosecution’s failure to provide
sufficient evidence of “malicious intent”, a
necessary element of the crime they were
charged with.
On 10 June, the Tbilisi Court of Appeals
upheld the 2015 ruling of the lower court,
which transferred the ownership of the pro-
opposition broadcaster, Rustavi 2, to its
former owner. He had claimed that he sold
the company more than a decade earlier
under pressure from the then UNM
government. The litigation took place after
the statute of limitations had expired, and
was widely believed to have been supported
by the current government with a view to
depriving the UNM of its main mouthpiece
ahead of the parliamentary elections.
On 14 June, the European Court of
Human Rights ruled in Merabishvili v Georgia
that the repeated extension of the applicant’s
pre-trial detention on corruption charges
“lacked reasonableness” and was used “as
an additional opportunity to obtain leverage
over the unrelated investigation” into the
death of former Prime Minister Zurab
Zhvania and financial activities of former
President Mikheil Saakashvili.
On 21 July, the Chairman of the
Constitutional Court stated that some judges
of the Court were pressured by the authorities
to delay verdicts or rule in their favour in
several high-profile cases. Prosecutors
opened an investigation into his allegations
on 1 August.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
remained largely unrestricted, bar some
165incidents of politically motivated violence
against rivals by Georgian Dream party
loyalists, but also on occasion by UNM
supporters.
On 22 May, around a dozen unidentified
men assaulted a group of prominent UNM
members at a polling station in Kortskheli
village. Eyewitnesses said the attack
appeared to be organized. Footage shows
UNM members being punched, knocked to
the ground and beaten with wooden batons.
Several police officers at the scene failed to
prevent the assault and allowed the attackers
to leave the scene. On 1 June, six men were
charged with hooliganism in connection with
the attack and released on bail.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 15 February, Parliament dropped a bill
that sought to make “insulting religious
feelings” an administrative offence. The bill
had been approved by the parliamentary
Human Rights Committee and sought,
among other things, to penalize criticism of
religious leaders.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
On 9 August, President Margvelashvili
refused to call a referendum on a
constitutional amendment to restrict the
definition of marriage in the Constitution from
“the voluntary union based on equality
between the spouses” to “a union between a
man and a woman”. The bill originally calling
for the constitutional amendment had been
endorsed by the parliamentary Human Rights
Committee in May.
On 23 November, a transgender woman,
attacked and beaten by two men, died of her
injuries in hospital. A local women’s rights
NGO reported registering at least 35 attacks
on LGBTI women during the year. The Public
Defender Office joined local rights groups in
raising concerns regarding the lack of
effective investigation and accountability over
crimes targeting LGBTI people.
166
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Amid concerns about torture and other ill-
treatment, and other abuses, by law
enforcement officers, the government failed
to bring forward legislation creating an
independent investigation mechanism for
human rights violations committed by law
enforcement bodies.
On 7 August, a local police inspector
summoned Demur Sturua, a 22-year-old
resident of Dapnari, Western Georgia, for
questioning about someone growing
cannabis in the village. The following day,
Demur Sturua committed suicide. His suicide
note blamed the police inspector and
mentioned beating and threats. His family’s
lawyer said that a postmortem examination
found physical injuries. The investigation into
the case was ongoing at the end of the year.
There were subsequent media reports that
residents in remote villages, who may have
suffered similar treatment at the hands of
police officials, were not willing to present a
complaint for fear of reprisals and lack of
trust in the authorities.
GERMANY
Federal Republic of Germany
Head of state: Joachim Gauck
Head of government: Angela Merkel
The authorities made considerable efforts to
house and process the large number of
asylum-seekers who arrived in 2015.
However, the government also adopted
several laws to restrict the rights of asylum-
seekers and refugees, including on family
reunification. The number of racist and
xenophobic attacks on asylum shelters
remained high and the authorities failed to
adopt effective strategies to prevent them.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The number of new asylum-seekers
decreased considerably compared to 2015.
The government registered approximately
Amnesty International Report 2016/17304,900 arrivals between January and
November compared with 890,000 in 2015.
The authorities improved their capacity to
process asylum applications throughout the
year. Between January and November,
approximately 702,490 individuals, many of
whom had arrived in Germany the previous
year, claimed asylum. The authorities made a
decision in about 615,520 cases. The rate at
which Syrians, Iraqis and Afghans received
full refugee status decreased compared
with the previous year; more individuals were
granted subsidiary protection and fewer
received full refugee status. The former
status granted fewer rights, including with
respect to family reunification. Between
January and November, 59% of Syrian
applicants obtained full refugee status
compared with 99.6% in the same period
of 2015.
In March, new amendments to asylum
laws entered into force. The right to family
reunification for individuals with subsidiary
protection status was suspended until March
2018. A new fast-track procedure for
assessing asylum applications from a variety
of categories of applicants, including asylum-
seekers from countries deemed to be “safe”,
was introduced without providing for
sufficient guarantees to ensure access to a
fair asylum procedure. At the end of the year,
a law defining Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia
as “safe” countries of origin was pending
before the Federal Council. The new fast-
track procedure had not been implemented
by the end of the year.
In May, Parliament passed the first ever
law on integration for refugees and asylum-
seekers. The law aimed at creating
employment and educational opportunities
for refugees and imposed on them the
obligation to follow integration courses. It also
allowed authorities of the federal states to
impose restrictions on where refugees could
reside, tightened conditions for issuing
residence permits and introduced new
benefit cuts for those not complying with the
new rules.
Until 19 December, Germany relocated
640 refugees from Greece and 455 from
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Italy. As part of the EU-Turkey Deal, Germany
accepted the transfer of 1,060 Syrian
refugees from Turkey. Despite the worsening
security situation in Afghanistan, authorities
forcibly returned more than 60 Afghan
nationals whose asylum applications had
been rejected. In 2015, fewer than 10
unsuccessful Afghan asylum-seekers were
forcibly returned.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The authorities continued to fail to effectively
investigate allegations of ill-treatment by the
police and did not establish any independent
complaints mechanism to investigate those
allegations.
At the end of the year, the governments of
North-Rheine Westphalia and Sachsen
Anhalt were planning to introduce the
obligation for police officers to wear identity
badges while on duty.
The Joint Commission of the National
Agency for the Prevention of Torture –
Germany’s preventive mechanism under the
Optional Protocol to the UN Convention
against Torture – remained understaffed and
underfinanced.
In April, the Hannover Prosecution Office
closed the investigation into allegations of ill-
treatment by a federal police officer against
two Afghan and Moroccan refugees in the
holding cells of the federal police at
Hannover’s main train station in 2014. In
September, the Celle Upper Regional Court
rejected the request introduced by one of the
victims to reopen the investigation.
DISCRIMINATION
The second Committee of Inquiry,
established by Parliament in October 2015,
pursued its investigation into some of the
authorities’ failures to investigate the racist
and xenophobic crimes perpetrated against
members of ethnic minorities by the far-right
group National Socialist Underground
between 2000 and 2007. No official inquiry
was launched into the potential role of
institutional racism behind those failures,
despite the 2015 recommendations of the
UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
167Discrimination and the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Dozens of anti-refugee and anti-Muslim
demonstrations were staged throughout the
country. In the first nine months of the year,
authorities registered 813 crimes against
asylum shelters. In the same period, 1,803
crimes against asylum-seekers were
registered by the authorities, 254 of them
resulted in bodily injuries. The authorities
failed to put in place an adequate
national strategy to prevent attacks on
asylum shelters.
Civil society organizations continued to
report discriminatory identity checks by
police on members of ethnic and
religious minorities.
In June, the Federal Court of Justice
rejected the request of an intersex person to
be legally registered according to a third
gender option. The applicant’s appeal was
pending before the Federal Constitutional
Court at the end of the year.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In October, Parliament passed a new law on
surveillance that granted the Federal
Intelligence Service broad powers to subject
non-EU citizens to surveillance without
effective judicial oversight and for a wide
range of purposes, including national
security. In August, several UN special
procedures, including the Special Rapporteur
on freedom of expression, expressed concern
regarding the negative impact of the law on
freedom of expression and the lack of judicial
oversight.
In April, the Federal Constitutional Court
ruled that some of the surveillance powers of
the Federal Criminal Police Office, which had
been introduced in 2009 to counteract
terrorism and crimes more generally, were
unconstitutional. In particular, some of the
measures did not ensure the respect of the
right to privacy. Those provisions remained in
force pending their amendment.
ARMS TRADE
In March, the government put in place the
necessary legal framework for selective post-
168
shipment controls to improve the monitoring
of German exports of war weapons and
specific types of firearms to ensure
compliance with end-use certificates and that
they were not used to commit human rights
violations. Under these controls, the
whereabouts of exported war weapons would
be checked post-shipment in the recipient
countries. Governments receiving German
military equipment would have to declare in
an end-use statement that they agree to on-
the-spot controls. Such end-use statements
were signed for at least four licensed small
arms exports. The government was
implementing the first pilot phase of the new
mechanism at the end of the year.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In August, the Regional Court of Dortmund
accepted to exercise jurisdiction over a legal
claim brought in 2015 by four Pakistani
victims against the German clothing retailer
KiK and granted them legal aid. In
September 2012, 260 workers died and 32
were seriously injured in a fire that destroyed
one of the main textile factories in Pakistan
supplying KiK.
In December, the government adopted a
National Action Plan to implement the UN
Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights. However, the Plan did not include
adequate measures to comply with all
standards set out in the Principles and did
not ensure that German business enterprises
exercise due diligence to respect human
rights.
GHANA
Republic of Ghana
Head of state and government: John Dramani Mahama
Concerns were raised about the rights of
women and children, discrimination against
people with disabilities, and legal
shortcomings in relation to human rights
protection. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people
Amnesty International Report 2016/17continued to face discrimination, violence
and police harassment. Death sentences
were handed down.
BACKGROUND
In June, Ghana’s human rights record was
reviewed for the first time by the UN Human
Rights Committee to assess compliance with
its obligations under the ICCPR.
In September, Ghana ratified the Optional
Protocol to the UN Convention against
Torture, which establishes a system of regular
visits to places of detention as a measure to
protect detainees and prisoners from torture
or other ill-treatment. General elections took
place in December; Nana Akufo-Addo of the
New Patriotic Party was elected President.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The Human Rights Committee and civil
society organizations remained concerned at
the persistence of child labour. The
Committee called for investigations into the
worst forms of child labour and better public
sensitization campaigns on the issue.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The Human Rights Committee recommended
that Ghana establish an independent
mechanism to investigate alleged misconduct
by police officers, as well as measures to
ensure that its law and practice comply with
the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION RIGHT TO HEALTH
In February, the Interception of Postal
Packets and Telecommunication Messages
Bill (2015) was put before Parliament. It
proposes the interception of all
communications for the undefined purposes
of “protecting national security” and “fighting
crime generally”. Civil society raised
concerns that the lack of clear definition
would give authorities wide discretion to
intercept communications, and said that the
bill lacked sufficient safeguards.
The Human Rights Committee stated that
Ghana should expedite the enactment of the
Right to Information Bill and ensure that its
provisions conform to the ICCPR. The Human Rights Committee raised
concern at the stigmatization and
discrimination faced by people with
disabilities, which it cited as major
contributing factors to the inadequate
treatment of patients with mental health
illness and the poor conditions at public
psychiatric institutions. It also expressed
concern at the hundreds of unregistered
private “prayer camps” to deal with illness,
particularly mental illness, which operated
with little oversight and no state regulation. It
noted reports regarding the use of torture and
other ill-treatment in such camps, including
shackling and forced fasting.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
The Human Rights Committee raised
concerns about legislative provisions that
discriminate against women in relation to
property ownership, access to formal credit
and inheritance. It noted delays in the
adoption of the Property Rights of Spouses
Bill, which was put forward in 2013. It made
recommendations concerning domestic
violence, including further legislation to
enhance implementation of the Domestic
Violence Act 2007, increased social services
and shelters for survivors of domestic
violence, and improved investigation and
prosecution of cases.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Consensual same-sex relations between men
remained a criminal offence. Local
organizations reported that LGBTI people
continued to face police harassment as well
as discrimination, violence and instances of
blackmail in the wider community.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences, although the last execution was in
1993. Ghana retains the mandatory death
penalty for some offences despite the Human
Rights Committee’s condemnation of
169mandatory death sentences. The main death
row facility for men remained overcrowded
and inmates continued to be denied access
to activities such as sport and education.
Proposals made by the Constitutional
Review Implementation Committee to abolish
the death penalty continued to be stalled as a
result of delays in the constitutional review
process.
GREECE
Hellenic Republic
Head of state: Prokopis Pavlopoulos
Head of government: Alexis Tsipras
Greece faced considerable challenges in
providing adequate reception conditions
and access to asylum procedures for
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants
following the announcement of the EU-
Turkey migration deal. There was evidence
that at least eight Syrian refugees were
forcibly returned to Turkey. The closure of
the Balkans route left thousands of
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants
stranded in mainland Greece in poor
conditions. Allegations of torture and other
ill-treatment by members of the security
forces during arrest and/or detention
continued. In December, new legislation
established a national police complaints
mechanism.
BACKGROUND
Parliament adopted further austerity
measures including tax rises, pension cuts
and the transfer of state assets to a
privatization fund. In February, the UN
Independent Expert on the effects of foreign
debt concluded that austerity measures
implemented since 2010 contributed
significantly to the widespread erosion of
social and economic rights and pervasive
poverty in Greece.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
By the end of the year, 173,450 refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants had arrived by
170
sea in Greece. More than 434 people died or
were reported missing while trying to cross
the Aegean Sea. There were around 47,400
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants on
the mainland and 15,384 on the islands.
The EU-Turkey migration deal
On 18 March 2016, the EU and Turkey
agreed to a far-reaching migration control
deal under which Turkey agreed to take back
all “irregular migrants” arriving on the Greek
islands after 20 March, in exchange for €6
billion of targeted assistance. While people
were formally guaranteed access to an
asylum determination process, the deal
allowed for those arriving on the Greek
islands via Turkey to be returned to Turkey
without a substantive examination of their
claims. This was based on the premise that
Turkey was a “safe third country”. Research
during the year established that Turkey was
not a safe country for asylum-seekers and
refugees. The numbers arriving dropped
sharply after 20 March, and by the end of
the year, an average of 50 people were
arriving daily.
Between May and June, dozens of asylum
applications lodged by refugees from Syria
which were refused on “safe third country”
grounds, were upheld on appeal. In June,
Parliament adopted an amendment that
changed the composition of the Asylum
Appeals Committees (Appeals Committees)
panel to include two judges and a person
nominated by UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, or the National Commission of
Human Rights.
During the same month, two Syrians who
had arrived in Greece via Turkey were the
first to be at imminent risk of forcible return
to Turkey after the Appeals Committees
rejected their appeals on “safe third country”
grounds. In October, a third Syrian refugee
was threatened with forcible return to Turkey
after he was detained when his asylum
appeal was dismissed by an Appeals
Committee, on the same grounds. In
November, the Council of State heard a
petition which challenged the rejection of his
asylum appeal on safe third-country grounds;
Amnesty International Report 2016/17and the constitutionality of the composition of
the Appeals Committees. It had not ruled on
the case by the end of the year.
There was evidence that at least eight
Syrian refugees were forcibly returned to
Turkey. They had registered their intention to
claim asylum but were returned from Kos on
20 October before they could lodge their
applications.
Reception conditions for refugees, asylum-
seekers and migrants stranded on the islands
were overcrowded and insanitary; they
provided inadequate security and people
faced uncertainty about their future. This
fuelled tension that occasionally erupted into
violence, including riots in the Lesvos, Chios
and Leros “hotspots”.
Detention of asylum-seekers and migrants
In April, thousands of people who arrived on
the islands after the implementation of the
EU-Turkey migration deal, were detained
arbitrarily. Although the most vulnerable were
soon released and the vast majority of
asylum-seekers were gradually allowed to
move freely in and out of the “hotspots”, a
large number of people were not permitted to
leave the island of arrival until their asylum
applications were examined.
The closure of the Balkan route
In March, the closure of the Greek border
with Macedonia resulted in thousands of
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants left
stranded on mainland Greece (see
Macedonia entry). Thousands stayed in the
large informal camps in Idomeni and Piraeus
in dire conditions. Others found shelter in
official refugee camps that were being set up
across the country. Between May and July,
the Greek authorities evacuated the camps of
Polykastro, Idomeni and Piraeus ports.
Conditions in the majority of official
refugee camps around mainland Greece
were inadequate for hosting individuals even
for a few days. The camps, hosting around
20,000 at the end of the year, were either
tented or established in abandoned
warehouses and some were in remote areas
far from hospitals and other services. By the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
end of the year, 23,047 relocation applicants,
particularly vulnerable asylum-seekers and
unaccompanied children, were provided with
accommodation through a project run by
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency.
By the end of the year, only 7,286 asylum-
seekers had been relocated from Greece to
other European countries, while the total
number of places pledged was 66,400.
Access to asylum
Those seeking access to asylum procedures
met with serious obstacles including being
unable to lodge their asylum requests
through Skype or only after repeated
attempts. In June, the Greek Asylum Service
carried out a large scale pre-registration
programme of applications for international
protection in mainland Greece. In July, the
authorities announced that they had pre-
registered 27,592 people, including 3,481
belonging to vulnerable groups.
Right to education
In August, Parliament adopted a legislative
provision for the creation of special classes
for school-age children. In October, around
580 school-age refugees, asylum-seekers
and migrants began classes in the capital
Athens and Thessaloniki. There were reports
of xenophobic incidents including parents
refusing to accept the children in schools in
Oreokastro and Lesvos.
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
In September, Greece was found in breach of
Article 9 of the European Convention on
Human Rights (in the Papavasilakis v Greece
case) for failing to ensure that conscientious
objectors’ interviews with the Special Board
met procedural efficiency and equal
representation standards. The Special Board
examines requests for alternative civilian
service.
The same month, the Greek government
rejected recommendations by the UN
Human Rights Council to establish an
alternative to military service which was not
punitive or discriminatory and to ensure that
171conscientious objectors do not face
harassment or prosecution. concerning prisoners in Larissa, Thessaloniki,
Trikala and Komotini.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT DISCRIMINATION - ROMA
Allegations of torture or other ill-treatment of
individuals, including refugees, asylum-
seekers and migrants during arrest or in
immigration detention, persisted.
On 27 September, five Syrian boys, aged
between 12 and 16, were stopped by the
police in central Athens while they were
carrying toy guns as props on their way to
perform in a play. The children said that they
were beaten and forced to strip naked during
their detention in the Omonoia police station.
A criminal and a disciplinary investigation
were ordered into the incident.
The national NGO Greek Helsinki Monitor
(GHM) reported that three Roma men were
beaten by the police during their arrest and
detention at a western Athens police station
in October. One of the men suffered a heart
attack and was hospitalized with serious
injuries. Despite requests by the victims and
GHM, a forensic examination was refused.
GHM filed a complaint of torture and breach
of duty with the Athens Prosecutor tasked
with investigating hate crimes.
During the same month, a court in
Thessaloniki found 12 prison guards guilty of
torturing and causing serious bodily harm to
Ilia Karelli, an Albanian national found dead
in his cell in Nigrita prison in March 2014.
They were given prison sentences ranging
between five and seven years.
In December, Parliament adopted a law
designating the Greek Ombudsperson as a
national police complaints mechanism. The
mechanism has the power to conduct its own
investigations but its recommendations to the
disciplinary bodies of law enforcement
agencies are non-binding. In August, the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination
expressed concern about the situation of
Roma in Greece including the obstacles they
faced in accessing basic services such as
education and housing; and being subjected
to frequent identity checks and police
harassment.
RACISM
Hate-motivated attacks continued to be
documented against people belonging to
vulnerable groups including refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants.
In July, a squat providing shelter for
refugees in Athens was targeted in an arson
attack by members of a far-right group. The
perpetrators had not been identified by the
end of the year.
In November, suspected far-right
extremists attacked refugees in Souda camp
on Chios Island, injuring at least two. Two
activists who tried to assist the refugees were
also attacked and subsequently hospitalized.
A criminal investigation into the incidents
began.
At the end of November, a court in Piraeus
upheld on appeal a first-instance decision
which found four men guilty of abducting,
robbing and causing serious bodily harm to
Egyptian migrant worker Walid Taleb in 2012.
The trial of leaders and members of the
Golden Dawn, a far-right political party, who
were charged with the murder of Pavlos
Fyssas in 2013 and the founding of a
criminal organization, continued at the end of
the year.
PRISON CONDITIONS RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Prison conditions remained a cause of
serious concern. Greece was found to be in
breach of the European Convention on
Human Rights on account of poor prison
conditions and/or lack of effective remedies
to challenge such conditions in nine cases In May, the Ministry of Justice established a
preparatory committee to draft a bill allowing
for the legal recognition of the gender identity
of transgender people through an
administrative process without the
requirement to undergo gender reassignment
172
Amnesty International Report 2016/17surgery. In June, the Athens Magistrates’
Court allowed a transgender man to change
his gender marker in his identification
documents without gender reassignment
surgery.
GUATEMALA
Republic of Guatemala
Head of state and government: Jimmy Morales Cabrera
(replaced Alejandro Maldonado Aguirre in January)
Smear campaigns and the misuse of the
criminal justice system to harass and
intimidate human rights defenders
continued. Defenders working on land,
territorial and environmental issues were at
particular risk. People continued to flee the
country to escape high levels of inequality
and violence. There was a landmark
decision by the High-Risk Court A in a case
concerning sexual violence and the
domestic slavery of 11 Indigenous women
during the internal armed conflict. Other
high-profile cases against former members
of the military continued to suffer setbacks
and undue delays. The Congressional
Human Rights Commission presented a bill
to abolish the death penalty.
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE
In January, the trial of José Efraín Ríos Montt,
former President and Commander-in-Chief,
and José Mauricio Rodríguez Sánchez,
former Military Intelligence Director, on
charges of genocide and crimes against
humanity was postponed. 1 In March, the trial
began before a High-Risk Court and, in May,
a Court of Appeals found in favour of the
plaintiffs’ request to be tried separately. The
Rios Montt trial had to take place behind
closed doors in light of the special provisions
adopted after it was determined that he was
mentally unfit to stand trial. Both trials
remained stalled at the end of the year.
Five former members of the military,
including Benedicto Lucas García, former
head of the High Command of the
Guatemalan Army, were charged in relation
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
to the illegal detention, torture and sexual
violence committed against Emma
Guadalupe Molina Theissen, and the
enforced disappearance of Marco Antonio
Molina Theissen. According to local NGOs,
several hearings were suspended and the
judiciary imposed restrictions and
requirements on the victim’s family and the
general public. Members of the Molina
Theissen family were subjected to
harassment, including online. Women family
members faced particular forms of gender-
based violence, including harassment
and vilification.
In a landmark decision by the High-Risk
Court A in February, two former military
officials were found guilty of crimes against
humanity for the sexual and domestic
enslavement of and the sexual violence
against 11 Indigenous Maya Q’eqchi’ women.
The crimes took place in the military base
located in the community of Sepur Zarco
during the internal armed conflict. 2
In June, High-Risk Court A ruled that eight
former members of the military should face
trial on charges related to cases of enforced
disappearances and unlawful killings carried
out in a military base now known as
Creompaz in the northern Alta Verapaz
region. 3 Relatives of the victims were the
targets of online harassment, intimidation
inside and outside the courtroom,
surveillance and threats.
Civil society organizations continued to
push for the approval of Law 3590, which
would create a National Commission for the
Search for Victims of Enforced
Disappearance and Other Forms of
Disappearance. The law, which was first
presented before Congress in 2006, had not
been discussed by the end of 2016.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders faced continuing
threats, stigmatization, intimidation and
attacks. According to the NGO UDEFEGUA,
14 human rights defenders were killed. The
environmental human rights defenders were
the group who faced the highest number of
attacks. Defenders of the land, territory and
173the environment faced vilification and
attempts to cast them as criminals, both by
officials in their public statements and by
private individuals, as well as through
baseless criminal proceedings. 4
The prosecution of human rights defender
Daniel Pascual on criminal charges of
slander, libel and defamation continued
during the year. The charges were linked to
public statements he had made in 2013. The
judge ignored the defendant’s petition that
the case be dealt with under the
Constitutional Law on the Expression of
Thought and not through ordinary criminal
proceedings. On 7 June, the Constitutional
Court granted an interim injunction that
temporarily suspended proceedings against
Daniel Pascual.
In early 2016, a well-known human rights
defender received death threats against
herself and her children. Threats against the
defender coincided with the publication in a
newspaper of a paid advertisement on 6 April
in which the president of a private company
alleged that the purpose of human rights
NGOs was to stop economic development,
calling them enemies of the country.
On 22 July, High-Risk Court A in
Guatemala City acquitted seven defenders of
the rights of the Indigenous Maya Q’anjobal
People. They had been accused of illegal
detention, threats and incitement to commit a
crime. By the time they were released, they
had spent more than a year in pre-trial
detention.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
For decades, Guatemalans have migrated to
the USA via Mexico in an effort to escape the
high levels of inequality and violence
affecting marginalized groups, including
Indigenous Peoples, in the country. Over the
past five years, large numbers have been
forcibly returned to Guatemala. However, no
comprehensive mechanism or protocol had
been put in place to address the needs of
returnees. According to UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, between January and
August, 11,536 Guatemalans sought asylum
in other countries. In September, the
174
Congress approved a new Migration Code to
replace the existing outdated migration law. 5
LAND DISPUTES
In February, the Supreme Court temporarily
suspended the operating licence for El
Tambor mine in a judgment concerning the
failure to carry out prior consultation. The
Ministry of Energy and Mines stated that the
licence had already been granted and so
could not be suspended. As a result, from
March onwards the community held sit-ins at
the headquarters of the Ministry of Energy
and Mines calling for the interim relief
granted by the Supreme Court to be
enforced. At the end of June, the Supreme
Court upheld its previous decision in a
definitive manner.
1. Guatemala: Shameful decision to postpone Ríos Montt trial a new
stain on Guatemala’s justice system (News story, 11 January)
2. Guatemala: Conviction of military in sexual abuse case, a historic
victory for justice (Press release, 26 February)
3. Guatemala: Decision to take Creompaz case to trial an advance for
justice (AMR 34/4218/2016)
4. Americas: “We are defending the land with our blood”: Defenders of
the land, territory and environment in Honduras and Guatemala (AMR
01/4562/2016)
5. Americas: Home sweet home? Honduras, Guatemala and El
Salvador’s role in a deepening refugee crisis (AMR 01/4865/2016)
GUINEA
Republic of Guinea
Head of state: Alpha Condé
Head of government: Mamady Youla
The security forces used excessive force
against peaceful demonstrators and
harassed people expressing dissent. Torture
and other ill-treatment were reported. The
security forces continued to enjoy impunity
for human rights violations. The death
penalty was abolished for ordinary crimes.
Early and enforced marriage was
criminalized.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17BACKGROUND
Local elections were postponed to February
2017, maintaining a tense political and social
environment. The last local elections were
held in 2005.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 17 June, soldiers publicly ill-treated a
lorry driver, sparking spontaneous protests in
the northern town of Mali. The army used
excessive force to disperse demonstrators,
including using firearms and batons. Over
two days, at least 14 people were wounded,
including four shot with live ammunition. On
16 November, 11 soldiers were charged,
including with assault and battery, pillage and
arson.
On 16 August, police shot dead Thierno
Hamidou Diallo as he was standing on his
balcony in the capital Conakry during a mass,
peaceful march of 500,000 to 700,000
opposition supporters. The Security Minister
announced that a policeman had been
arrested in relation to the killing. 1
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Security forces harassed and arbitrarily
arrested people expressing dissent.
On 24 March, Jean Dougou Guilavogui
and four other trade unionists were
sentenced to six months in prison and
ordered to pay damages for defamation and
“contempt of the President”. Jean Dougou
Guilavogui was released for time served on
25 March and his colleagues on 8 April. 2
On 22 June, the Tribunal of Kankan fined
journalist Malick Bouya Kébé 1 million
Guinean francs (approximately €100) for
complicity in “contempt of the President”
because he did not interrupt a listener who
was criticizing the President during a phone-
in programme. His guest, also a journalist,
was sentenced in his absence to one year in
prison and a fine of 1.5 million Guinean
francs (approximately €150) for “contempt of
the President”. They were tried without a
lawyer.
On 25 June, journalist Malick Diallo was
covering a meeting of the ruling party
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
attended by President Condé in Conakry. A
presidential guard asked him to hand over
his camera. When he refused, he was
pushed inside a car and taken to the office of
the presidential guards where he was beaten
and threatened. The guards took his camera
and deleted some of the pictures before
releasing him. The police refused to record
his complaint.
The revised Criminal Code, adopted on 4
July, criminalized contempt, defamation and
insult, including of public figures, with
penalties of up to five years’ imprisonment
and a fine. Vaguely worded provisions could
allow the prosecution of people who express
dissent or expose human rights violations,
including journalists and human rights
defenders.
The law on cyber-security and personal
data protection, passed on 2 June,
criminalized cyber-insults, the dissemination
and communication of “false information” as
well as the production, distribution or transfer
to third parties of data “likely to disturb law
and order or public security or jeopardize
human dignity”. The law likened the
disclosure of data “that should be kept
confidential” for national security reasons to
the crimes of treason or espionage, making it
punishable by life imprisonment. This
provision could be used against
whistleblowers. 3
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment were reported.
On 4 March, Ibrahima Diogo Sow was
arrested and taken to the Anti-Crime Brigade
in Kipé, a neighbourhood of Conakry. The
security forces suspended him by his hands
and feet from a wooden bar and hit him with
rifle butts and wooden sticks over three days.
Ibrahima Diogo Sow filed a complaint, but no
action was taken and he remained in
detention at the end of the year.
On 26 June, three gendarmes arrested
Oumar Sylla in Conakry and took him to a
building where they were posted. They tied
his feet and hands behind his back. One of
the gendarmes stabbed him in his left side
and poured boiling water on his chest. They
175asked him to confess to stealing a motorbike,
which he refused to do. He was taken to the
gendarmerie base ECO III the next day and
beaten with belts. Fearing for his life, Oumar
Sylla confessed and signed a statement he
said he did not understand.
The revised Criminal Code criminalized
torture and made it punishable by up to 20
years’ imprisonment. However, some acts
defined as torture under international law,
including rape, electric shocks, burns,
holding in stress positions, sensory
deprivation, mock executions and simulated
drowning, were classified as “inhuman and
cruel” treatment, for which no penalties were
specified.
DEATH PENALTY
The revised Criminal Code abolished the
death penalty for ordinary crimes. The
Military Code of Justice still provided for
capital punishment for exceptional crimes,
including treason and revolt at time of war or
state of emergency. A bill seeking to remove
these provisions was pending in the National
Assembly.
IMPUNITY
There was little progress in the trial relating to
the massacre in the Grand Stade de Conakry
in 2009, when security forces killed more
than 100 peaceful demonstrators and injured
at least 1,500 others. Dozens of women were
raped.
None of the members of the security
forces suspected of using excessive force
against peaceful opposition demonstrators,
leading to death and injuries between 2011
and 2016, have been brought to justice. 4
There was still no investigation of members
of the security forces involved in rape and
other forms of torture, systematic pillage and
contamination of water in Womey village,
Nzérékoré region, in September 2014.
No progress was made in the trial of four
members of the security forces charged with
killing six people during a strike at a mine in
Zogota in 2012.
The revised Criminal Code contained
vague language relating to actions justifiable
176
as “self-defence” as well as a new provision
called “state of necessity” that could shield
members of the security forces who caused
death or injury by using excessive force.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The revised Criminal Code criminalizes early
and enforced marriage, raising the legal age
for marriage to 18. However, ambiguity
remains as the Code refers to “marriage
according to custom” for children aged 16.
Guinea has one of the highest rates of child
marriage in the world, with three in five girls
married before the age of 18, according to
the latest study by the UN Population Fund
(UNFPA).
1. Guinée: Consternation face à la mort d’un homme par balle (News
story, 17 August)
2. Guinée: La condamnation de cinq syndicalistes est une violation du
droit à la liberté d’expression (News story, 25 March)
3. Guinea: New criminal code drops death penalty but fails to tackle
impunity and keeps repressive provisions (News story, 5 July)
4. Guinea: One year on, no justice for election violence (News story, 10
October)
GUINEA-BISSAU
Republic of Guinea-Bissau
Head of state: José Mário Vaz
Head of government: Umaro Sissoco Embaló (replaced
Baciro Djá in November, who replaced Carlos Correia in
May)
The continuing political crisis delayed
implementation of recommendations of the
UN Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of
2015, and hindered economic and social
reforms. No progress was made in
improving prison conditions. The judiciary
did not always follow due process, and was
criticized for incompetence and corruption.
BACKGROUND
In February, the UN Security Council
extended the mandate of the UN Integrated
Peace Building Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) for another year.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Tension between President Vaz, the
government and parliament, as well as within
the ruling African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC),
escalated, paralysing parliamentary
proceedings.
In January the National Assembly’s
Permanent Commission expelled 15
parliamentarians for refusing to support the
government’s programme. Political tension
was exacerbated when Prime Minister
Correia was dismissed in mid-May. The
appointment two weeks later of Baciro Djá as
Prime Minister triggered violent protest in
which police used force, including tear gas,
to disperse demonstrators who were throwing
stones and burning tyres outside the
presidential palace.
In September, Guinea-Bissau acceded to
the UN Convention relating to the Status of
Stateless Persons and the UN Convention on
the Reduction of Statelessness.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The criminal justice system remained weak
and failed to guarantee due process. In June,
the UN Special Rapporteur on the
independence of judges and lawyers reported
on her 2015 visit to Guinea-Bissau,
describing the justice system as “sad” and
“terrible”. She highlighted lack of resources,
incompetence, corruption, impunity and
limited access to justice as the main
obstacles to judicial independence.
In July, the Supreme Court took over 20
days, instead of the 10 days allowed by law,
to respond to the writs of habeas corpus
challenging the detention of parliamentarian
Gabriel So. His arrest was ordered by the
Bissau Regional Court despite his
parliamentary immunity.
In August, the Public Prosecutor’s Office
ordered the arrest and detention of João
Bernardo Vieira for allegedly violating bail. In
contravention of the law, he was not brought
before a judge within 48 hours from his
arrest; he was released after one week.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Accountability
Investigations into past human rights
violations, including political killings between
2009 and 2012 made no progress. However,
in May the Bissorã Regional Court, in the Oio
region, convicted four police officers of
beating Tchutcho Mendonça to death in July
2015 in police custody. Three officers were
sentenced to seven years and three months’
imprisonment and one to five years’
imprisonment.
PRISON CONDITIONS
The authorities took no action to improve
prison conditions. Inadequate sanitation, lack
of health care and food provision, and severe
overcrowding in prisons and detention
centres persisted. Detainees and prisoners
had to rely on their families for food and
medicine or on the goodwill of other inmates.
Conditions in detention centres in the
capital, Bissau, amounted to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment. The Criminal
Investigation Police cells, with capacity for 35
people, regularly held over 90. Detainees
were not separated according to sex, age or
type of crime, and uncharged detainees were
routinely held for longer than the 48 hours
prescribed by law.
HAITI
Republic of Haiti
Head of state: Jocelerme Privert (replaced Michel
Joseph Martelly in February as acting President)
Head of government: Enex Jean-Charles (replaced
Evans Paul in February as acting Prime Minister)
Elections were postponed several times. A
hurricane hit Haiti in October causing a
major humanitarian crisis. Thousands of
people returned or were deported from the
Dominican Republic, including stateless
people, creating humanitarian concerns.
Little progress was made on the situation of
people displaced by the 2010 earthquake.
177BACKGROUND
In January presidential and legislative
elections scheduled for 17 January and later
for 24 January were postponed by the
Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) following
violent protests, where police were alleged to
have used force, in response to allegations of
electoral fraud during the first rounds of
elections in 2015.
On 5 February a national agreement
establishing a transitional government was
reached to find a solution to the political
crisis. President Martelly ended his mandate
on 7 February. Jocelerme Privert was elected
interim President and Enex Jean-Charles was
appointed as interim Prime Minister.
Elections scheduled for April were once again
postponed as the Independent Electoral
Verification Commission, which was
established in April, confirmed that there was
widespread fraud during the October 2015
balloting and recommended new elections
take place. The CEP issued a new electoral
calendar for elections in October and
January 2017.
In October, Hurricane Matthew caused the
country’s largest humanitarian emergency
since the 2010 earthquake, particularly in the
southern provinces. More than 500 people
were killed and almost as many injured.
Extensive flooding and mudslides damaged
infrastructure and buildings and caused
water shortages. Livelihoods in some areas
were almost entirely destroyed while 1.4
million people needed urgent humanitarian
assistance. It caused an increase in internal
migration from rural areas to overcrowded
cities where access to adequate housing was
already limited. In this context elections were
again postponed and took place on 20
November. Jovenel Moïse was elected as
President and was due to be sworn in on 7
February 2017. Although President Privert’s
term expired on 14 June, he remained as
interim President at the end of the year. The
political crisis severely affected the country’s
capacity to adopt essential legislation and
policies to improve the protection and
promotion of human rights.
178
The mandate of the UN Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) was renewed
for six months in October.
In November, Haiti’s human rights record
was examined under the UN Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) process. Haiti
accepted various recommendations,
including to accede to the UN Conventions
on Statelessness, to strengthen its legal
framework against gender-based violence
and to enhance protection of human rights
defenders. It rejected recommendations to
protect lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) people or to join
the ICC. 1
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
Hurricane Matthew affected 2.1 million
people across the country, including nearly
900,000 children. One hundred and seventy
five thousand people were left homeless. The
situation was compounded by the fact that
55,107 were still homeless from the 2010
earthquake and, by November, were living in
31 camps, a number which had hardly
decreased since June 2015.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
People of Haitian origin continued to arrive
spontaneously in Haiti from the Dominican
Republic, while others had been deported by
the Dominican authorities. About 2,220 of
them settled in makeshift camps at the
southern border region of Anse-à-Pitre where
they lived in dismal conditions with restricted
access to water, sanitation, health care and
education. 2 Despite a relocation programme
in operation up until June, dozens of families
remained in the camps at the end of the year.
RIGHT TO HEALTH –
CHOLERA EPIDEMIC
Between January and July, 21,661 suspected
cholera cases and 200 related deaths were
registered, with nearly 9,000 cases reported
after Hurricane Matthew. In August, the UN
acknowledged, for the first time, its role in the
initial outbreak for which the UN Secretary-
General apologized publicly in December. He
also announced a new plan to deal with the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17outbreak. The UN continued to deny all
attempts by victims to gain access to legal
remedies.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In September, public threats, including by
several parliamentarians, were made against
individuals and NGOs who were planning an
LGBTI Film Festival event. In September, the
Public Prosecutor of Port-au-Prince ordered
its cancellation for security reasons. In the
following days, there was a marked increase
in reports of homophobic attacks.
IMPUNITY
No progress was made in the investigation
into alleged crimes against humanity
committed by former President Jean-Claude
Duvalier and his collaborators. 3
1. Haiti: Internal displacement, forced evictions, statelessness – the
catalogue to violations continue (AMR 36/4658/2016)
2. “Where are we going to live?”: Migration and statelessness in
Dominican Republic and Haiti (AMR 36/4105/2016)
3. Haiti: Move ahead with ex-dictator case (AMR 36/3478/2016)
HONDURAS
Republic of Honduras
Head of state and government: Juan Orlando
Hernández Alvarado
A general climate of violence forced
thousands of Hondurans to flee the country.
Women, migrants, internally displaced
people, human rights defenders – especially
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) people as well as
environmental and land activists – were
particularly targeted with violence. A weak
criminal justice system contributed to a
climate of impunity.
BACKGROUND
The government assigned several public
security tasks to units made up of officers
with military training in an attempt to tackle
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
violence, corruption and organized crime.
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights (IACHR) raised concerns about the
military carrying out public security
operations, including use of excessive force.
The presence of military corps on Indigenous
territories contributed to social unrest. Over
100 high-ranking police officers were
dismissed in a move to purge security forces
accused of being infiltrated by organized
crime.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Widespread violence across the country
forced many to flee – mostly women,
children, youth and LGBTI people. People
perceived by criminal gangs to have refused
to comply with their authority or who had
witnessed a crime were routinely harassed,
attacked and extorted; young people in
particular were forced to join criminal gangs.
Deportees forcibly returned from Mexico
and the USA continued to face the same life-
threatening situations which initially pushed
them to leave. In July, an asylum-seeker who
had been forcibly returned from Mexico after
the rejection of his asylum application was
murdered less than three weeks after his
return. 1
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Honduras remained one of the most
dangerous countries in Latin America for
human rights defenders, especially for
environmental and land activists. According
to the NGO Global Witness, Honduras had
the highest number per capita of killings of
environmental and land activists in the
world. 2 Berta Cáceres, leader and co-founder
of the Civil Council of Popular and Indigenous
Organizations of Honduras (COPINH), was
shot dead in her home on 2 March. The
Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights had granted her precautionary
measures since 2009, but the authorities
failed to implement effective measures to
protect her. Along with other COPINH
members who protested against the
construction of the Agua Zarca dam in the
community of Río Blanco, she suffered
179continued harassment, threats and attacks
by state and non-state actors before
her death.
On 18 October, José Ángel Flores and
Silmer Dionisio George of the Unified
Campesino Movement of the Aguán were
murdered. Both human rights defenders
were shot dead after attending a meeting with
several campesino (peasant farmer) people
in the Bajo Aguán region, northeastern
Honduras. In November, Bertha Oliva, co-
ordinator of the Committee of Relatives of the
Disappeared in Honduras (COFADEH) was
subjected to a smear campaign, aimed at
linking her with drug cartels and discrediting
her human rights work. COFADEH has a long
history of promoting human rights of
campesino people in the Bajo Aguan region.
According to the NGO ACI-PARTICIPA,
more than 90% of all killings and abuses
against human rights defenders remained
unpunished.
LGBTI human rights defenders were also
particularly targeted with threats and attacks.
René Martínez, president of the Sampedrana
Gay Community in the city of San Pedro Sula,
was found dead on 3 June with his body
bearing signs of torture. The Worldwide
Movement for Human Rights reported that
members of the LGBTI rights group
Asociación Arcoiris were victims of 36
security incidents between July 2015 and
January 2016, including killings, threats,
surveillance and harassment. The military
was accused of infiltrating social movements
and attacking human rights defenders.
The Law to Protect Human Rights
Defenders, Journalists, Social Commentators
and Justice Officials had yet to be properly
implemented.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
A lack of resources for institutions
responsible for supporting Indigenous
Peoples continued to be a concern. Several
Indigenous Peoples claimed their rights to
consultation and to free, prior and informed
consent had been violated in the context of
projects to explore and exploit natural
resources in their territories. A lack of access
180
to justice for Indigenous Peoples in cases of
aggression, including killings, remained a
challenge. In addition to Berta Cáceres, one
Tolupán Indigenous leader was killed on 21
February; he had been granted precautionary
measures by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights in December 2015. The
perpetrators had yet to be brought to justice.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women were routinely subjected to violence.
Between January and June, 227 women
were murdered. During the same period,
1,498 attacks and 1,375 incidents of sexual
violence against women were recorded.
Attacks against women remained widely
underreported. The country continued to lack
specific mechanisms for collection and
disaggregation of data related to the killings
of women. Abortion remained a crime in all
cases, including when the life and health of a
woman were at risk, or when the pregnancy
was a result of sexual violence. Emergency
contraception continued to be banned.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
In February, the National Congress elected
15 new members of the Supreme Court of
Justice for the next seven years. Several civil
society organizations raised concerns about
the selection process, which they said failed
to comply with international standards of
impartiality, independence and transparency.
Honduras had not yet complied with the
resolution of October 2015 of the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights in which it
found that the rights of four judges dismissed
for opposing a coup in 2009 were violated.
The judges had yet to be reinstated, and
other measures of reparation were
still pending.
1. Home sweet home? Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador’s role in a
deepening refugee crisis (AMR 01/4865/2016)
2. We are defending the land with our blood: Defenders of the land,
territory and environment in Honduras and Guatemala (AMR
01/4562/2016)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17HUNGARY
Hungary
Head of state: János Áder
Head of government: Viktor Orbán
An amendment to the Constitution allowed
the government to declare a state of
emergency under broad and vaguely worded
conditions, with little democratic oversight.
Roma continued to face discrimination and
to be victims of hate crimes. Hungary
continued its systematic crackdown on the
rights of refugees and migrants despite
growing international criticism.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
The government continued to extend the use
of anti-terror legislation. In January, the
European Court of Human Rights found in
Szabó and Vissy v Hungary that the Law on
Police violated the applicants’ right to respect
for private and family life as it enabled the
executive to intercept any communications
without supporting evidence and for
extended periods of time. The Court found
that Hungary failed to ensure adequate
judicial oversight and effective remedies
against unlawful surveillance.
In June, Parliament adopted a “Sixth
Amendment” to Hungary’s Fundamental Law
(Constitution) introducing a broadly worded
definition of a state of emergency on the
grounds of a “terror threat situation” that did
not meet the tests required under
international human rights law. The package
would allow the government to introduce
wide-ranging powers, including: restricting
freedom of movement within the country;
freezing assets of states, individuals,
organizations and legal entities; banning or
restricting events and public assemblies; and
applying undefined special measures to
prevent terrorism, without judicial or full
parliamentary oversight. Those powers could
be increased after 15 days if approved by
Parliament. Such a state of emergency would
also grant wide powers for the security forces
to use firearms in circumstances which went
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
well beyond what was permitted under
international law and standards.
In late November, a Syrian national was
sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment for
“acts of terror” for his involvement in clashes
with Hungarian border guards at a Serbia-
Hungary border crossing in September 2015.
Both parties appealed the first-instance
decision.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In October, the supposedly independent
Government Control Office (Kormányzati
Ellenőrzési Hivatal, known as KEHI) was
compelled by court order to disclose the
paper trail of its 2014 ad hoc audit of several
NGOs critical of government policies,
revealing that it was ordered personally by
the Prime Minister. The audit involved police
raids, confiscation of computers and servers
and lengthy investigations, but ended without
finding any criminal wrongdoing. Government
representatives continued to threaten several
NGOs involved with further investigations,
which contributed to a chilling effect on civil
society.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
Népszabadság – a newspaper critical of the
government – abruptly suspended
publication in October 2016 and all the
journalists were discharged. The shutdown
was carried out days before the company
was sold to an entrepreneur close to the
government.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
In June, the Grand Chamber of the European
Court of Human Rights found in Baka v
Hungary that terminating the mandate of the
President of the Hungarian Supreme Court
on account of his criticisms of legislative
reforms was contrary to the European
Convention on Human Rights. It found a
violation of Article 6 paragraph 1 (right of
access to a court) and of Article 10 (freedom
of expression).
181DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
In January, a court in the capital Budapest
instructed the municipality of Miskolc to
develop an action plan for the mostly Roma
residents who were evicted or facing eviction
from the Numbered Streets neighbourhood of
the city. However, the housing action plan
envisaged only 30 housing units for the
approximately 100 families affected, and did
not allocate additional funding for housing or
compensation.
In March, a court in Eger issued a first-
instance verdict that Roma children in Heves
County were unlawfully segregated in schools
and classes providing education designed for
children with special needs. In June, the
European Commission initiated infringement
proceedings against Hungary for
discrimination of Roma in education.
Hate crimes
The investigation and prosecution of hate
crimes continued to lack consistency. In
January, the Curia (Supreme Court) finally
issued its verdict in the case of the serial
killing of Roma people in 2008 and 2009,
targeted on the ground of their ethnicity. Six
people were killed including a five-year-old
boy, and several others were injured. Three
defendants were sentenced to life
imprisonment without parole (in
contravention of European human rights law),
and the fourth to 13 years in prison.
In April, an appeals court in Debrecen
reversed a first instance verdict which had
found that police discriminated against Roma
in the town of Gyöngyöspata when they failed
to protect local Roma residents from far-right
groups in 2011. The Hungarian Civil Liberties
Union appealed against the decision to
the Curia.
REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
Hungary continued to severely restrict access
to the country for refugees and asylum-
seekers, criminalizing thousands of people
for irregular entry across the border fences
put up at its southern border. The
government repeatedly extended a “state of
182
emergency due to mass immigration” and,
despite plummeting numbers of new arrivals
to the country, deployed over 10,000 police
and military personnel along the border.
Nearly 3,000 people were taken to court and
expelled for entering the country irregularly,
without a proper examination of their
protection needs, by the end of the year. A
number of legal amendments enabled the
immediate return of all non-citizens caught in
an irregular situation at the border or up to
8km inside Hungarian territory, and over
16,000 people were denied entry or were
returned forcibly, sometimes violently,
to Serbia.
On 31 March, the government’s list of
“safe countries of origin” and “safe third
countries” was expanded to include Turkey.
In May, the national assembly passed a set of
amendments significantly cutting access to
housing, health care and integration
programmes for people with protection
status.
Hungary suspended co-operation with
other EU countries and refused to accept
asylum-seekers from states participating in
the Dublin system. It attempted to return at
least 2,500 asylum-seekers already in
Hungary to Greece, despite the presumption
against returns to Greece in light of systemic
shortcomings in the Greek asylum system
confirmed by the European Court of Human
Rights.
Conditions in the Hungarian asylum
system prompted a number of other
European countries to rule against returning
people to Hungary, in some cases
recommending the suspension of Dublin
transfers altogether.
The detention of asylum-seekers in-
country continued to be implemented without
the necessary safeguards to ensure that it
was lawful, necessary and proportional. In
June, the European Court of Human Rights
found in O.M. v Hungary, that the asylum
detention of a gay asylum-seeker was in
violation of his right to liberty and safety. The
Court ruled that Hungary failed to make an
individualized assessment justifying the
applicant’s detention and to take into account
Amnesty International Report 2016/17the applicant’s vulnerability in the detention
facility based on his sexual orientation.
The government spent over €20 million on
communication campaigns labelling refugees
and migrants as criminals and threats to
national security. In October, it held a national
referendum on its opposition to the relocation
of asylum-seekers to Hungary within an EU-
wide scheme. The referendum was invalid
due to insufficient turnout. Together with
Slovakia, the government challenged the
legality of the European Council decision on
relocation quotas at the Court of Justice of
the European Union. The case was pending
at the end of the year.
In November, the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture issued a report on
immigration and asylum detention centres in
the country. It found that a considerable
number of foreign nationals, including
unaccompanied minors, reported that they
had been subjected to physical ill-treatment
by police officers. The government denied
the allegations.
INDIA
Republic of India
Head of state: Pranab Mukherjee
Head of government: Narendra Modi
The authorities used repressive laws to curb
freedom of expression and silence critics.
Human rights defenders and organizations
continued to face harassment and
intimidation, and vigilante cow protection
groups carried out several attacks.
Thousands protested against discrimination
and violence faced by Dalit communities.
Millions of people opposed changes to
labour laws. Marginalized communities
continued to be frequently ignored in the
government’s push for faster economic
growth. Tensions between India and
Pakistan intensified following an attack by
gunmen on an army base in Uri, Jammu
and Kashmir. Jammu and Kashmir state
witnessed months of curfew and a range of
human rights violations by authorities. A
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
ban on India’s largest currency bills,
intended as a crackdown on the country’s
black market, severely affected the
livelihoods of millions.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups in central India, northeastern
states and Jammu and Kashmir committed a
range of human rights abuses. The
Communist Party of India (Maoist) armed
group was suspected of extortion, abductions
and unlawful killings, including of local
government officials and suspected police
“informers”, in states such as Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Odisha, Maharashtra, Bihar and
Andhra Pradesh. The group was reported to
have used a lottery system to conscript
children in Jharkhand. It also targeted mobile
towers and vehicles used in road
construction and mining.
Armed groups in northeastern states
including Assam, Manipur and Meghalaya
were accused of extortion, abduction and
unlawful killings. In August, 14 people were
killed in an attack allegedly carried out by the
National Democratic Front of Bodoland
(Songbijit faction) armed group in Kokrajhar,
Assam.
Armed groups were also suspected of
killing people in Jammu and Kashmir. In
January, suspected members of the Jaish-E-
Mohammed armed group attacked an air
force base in Pathankot, Punjab state,
killing one civilian and seven security force
personnel.
CASTE-BASED DISCRIMINATION
AND VIOLENCE
Dalits and Adivasis continued to face
widespread abuses. According to official
statistics released in August, more than
45,000 crimes against members of
Scheduled Castes and almost 11,000 crimes
against Scheduled Tribes were reported in
2015. Dalits in several states were denied
entry into public and social spaces, and
faced discrimination in accessing public
services.
In January, the suicide of Dalit student
Rohith Vemula led to nationwide protests and
183debates on the discrimination and violence
faced by Dalits in universities. In March, the
police arrested students and faculty
peacefully protesting at the University of
Hyderabad, where Rohith Vemula had
studied. In July, widespread protests broke
out in Una, Gujarat state, following the public
flogging of four Dalit men by a vigilante cow
protection group for skinning a dead cow – a
traditional occupation for certain Dalits.
In April, the central government passed
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Rules,
which specified relief mechanisms available
to victims of caste-based violence.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
According to statistics released in August,
reports of crimes against children in 2015
rose by 5% compared with the previous year.
Under new laws that came into force in
January, juvenile justice authorities ordered
that children aged 16 to 18 be treated as
adults in cases of serious crimes. In June, a
juvenile justice board ordered that a 17-year-
old in Delhi be tried as an adult in an alleged
hit-and-run driving case. In August, another
17-year-old in Delhi was ordered to be
prosecuted as an adult in a case of
alleged rape.
In July, Parliament amended a child labour
law to prohibit the employment of children
under 14, but made an exception for children
working in family enterprises. The
amendments also allowed children aged 14
to 18 to work in occupations that were not
“hazardous”. Many child rights activists
opposed the amendments, which they said
would encourage child labour and
disproportionately affect children from
marginalized groups and girls.
In August, the central government
released a draft national education policy,
which made no mention of human rights
education.
COMMUNAL AND ETHNIC VIOLENCE
Vigilante cow protection groups harassed and
attacked people in states including Gujarat,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka in
184
the name of upholding laws prohibiting the
killing of cows.
In March, the bodies of two Muslim cattle
traders were found hanging from a tree in
Jharkhand. In June, members of a cow
protection group in Haryana forced two
Muslim men, who they suspected were beef
transporters, to eat cow dung. In August, a
woman in Haryana said that she and her 14-
year-old cousin were gang-raped by men who
accused them of eating beef.
In May, the High Court of Bombay, hearing
a case on a beef ban law, ruled that
preventing people from consuming a
particular type of food could violate their right
to privacy.
A team formed to reinvestigate closed
cases related to the 1984 Sikh massacre
identified 77 cases for further investigation
and invited people to testify. The functioning
of the team continued to lack transparency.
Black people faced racist harassment,
discrimination and violence in various cities.
In February, a Tanzanian woman was
stripped and beaten by a mob in Bengaluru,
Karnataka state. In May, a man from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was
beaten to death by a group of men in
New Delhi.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In February, the Ministry of Environment
approved the expansion of a coal mine in
Kusmunda, Chhattisgarh state, operated by
the state-owned company South Eastern
Coalfields, despite authorities not having
obtained the free, prior and informed consent
of affected Adivasi communities. The central
government continued to acquire land using
the Coal Bearing Areas Act, which allows for
the acquisition of Adivasi land without
consent.
In April, the Gujarat government amended
a central land acquisition law to exempt a
range of projects from seeking the consent of
affected families and conducting social
impact assessments. The same month, the
UN Special Rapporteur on adequate housing
stated that most forced evictions occurred
with impunity in India. In May, the Supreme
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Court rejected a petition challenging the
decision of 12 village assemblies in 2013 to
refuse permission for a bauxite mine
operated by a subsidiary of Vedanta
Resources and a state-owned company.
In July, the US-based Dow Chemical
Company and its subsidiary Union Carbide
Corporation failed, for the fourth time, to
appear before a Bhopal court to face criminal
charges related to the 1984 gas leak disaster.
In Jharkhand, police shot dead three men
demonstrating against a power plant in
August, and four villagers were killed by the
police following a protest against a state-
owned coal mine in October.
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
In April, a former Manipur state policeman
told journalists that he had been involved in
more than 100 extrajudicial executions in the
state between 2002 and 2009. In July, the
Supreme Court, hearing a case related to
over 1,500 extrajudicial executions in
Manipur, ruled that armed forces personnel
should not enjoy “blanket immunity” from
trials in civilian courts, and that the
allegations needed to be looked into.
In April, a Central Bureau of Investigation
court convicted 47 police personnel of
extrajudicially executing 10 men in Pilibhit,
Uttar Pradesh, in 1991. Security forces were
accused of carrying out several extrajudicial
executions in Chhattisgarh through the year.
In February, an Adivasi man was killed by
Chhattisgarh police in Bastar, Chhattisgarh,
in an alleged extrajudicial execution. The
same month, an Adivasi man was killed in an
alleged extrajudicial execution in Rayagada,
Odisha. In both cases, the police claimed
that the victims were Maoists.
In July, five people, including an infant,
were shot dead by security forces in
Kandhamal, Odisha. The security forces
claimed that the deaths had occurred during
crossfire in an encounter with Maoist groups.
In November, eight pre-trial detainees were
shot dead by the Madhya Pradesh police
near Bhopal after they escaped from prison.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The central authorities continued to use the
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act (FCRA)
– which restricts civil society organizations
from receiving foreign funding – to harass
NGOs. The authorities suspended the FCRA
registration of Lawyers Collective in June and
cancelled it in December.
In October the government refused to
renew the FCRA licences of 25 NGOs without
offering valid reasons. In December, it
cancelled the licences of seven other NGOs,
including Greenpeace India, Navsarjan,
Anhad, and two NGOs run by human rights
defenders Teesta Setalvad and Javed Anand.
Media reports quoted government sources as
saying that the NGOs had acted against
“national interest”.
In April, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association said that the FCRA restrictions
were not in conformity with international law,
principles and standards. In June, the UN
Special Rapporteurs on human rights
defenders, freedom of expression, and
freedom of association called on the Indian
government to repeal the FCRA.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Regressive laws continued to be used to
persecute people who legitimately exercised
their right to freedom of expression. In
February, three students at the Jawaharlal
Nehru University were arrested by police in
Delhi for sedition after they allegedly raised
“anti-national” slogans. The same month,
Delhi police also arrested an academic for
sedition for allegedly raising “anti-India”
slogans at a closed-door event. The sedition
law was also used to arrest people for writing
“anti-national” Facebook posts in Kerala, for
printing a map in Madhya Pradesh which did
not show all of Kashmir within Indian
borders, and for organizing a protest for
better working conditions for police personnel
in Karnataka.
In August, police in Karnataka registered a
sedition case against unnamed
representatives of Amnesty International
185India for allegedly conducting an “anti-
national” event on human rights violations in
Jammu and Kashmir. A complaint of sedition
was filed the same month in a Karnataka
court against an actress for refuting a
statement by a central government minister
that “visiting Pakistan was like going to hell”.
India’s information technology law was
used to persecute people. In March, two men
were arrested in Madhya Pradesh for
allegedly sharing a satirical image of a Hindu
nationalist group.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Journalists, lawyers and human rights
defenders were harassed and attacked with
impunity.
In February, journalist Karun Mishra was
shot dead by gunmen in Sultanpur, Uttar
Pradesh. The state police said he had been
targeted for his reports on illegal soil mining.
In May, Rajdeo Ranjan, a journalist in Siwan,
Bihar, who had faced threats from political
leaders for his writing, was shot dead.
In February, journalist Malini
Subramaniam was forced to leave Bastar
following an attack on her home and
pressure from police on her landlord. Another
journalist, Prabhat Singh, was arrested for
sharing a message online that mocked a
senior police official in Bastar. Bela Bhatia, a
researcher and activist, faced intimidation
and harassment from vigilante groups in
Bastar. Adivasi activist Soni Sori had a
chemical substance thrown at her face by
unidentified assailants. A group of human
rights lawyers who provided free legal aid to
Adivasi pre-trial detainees were also forced to
leave their home in Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh
state, following police pressure on their
landlord.
Journalist Santosh Yadav, who was
arrested in 2015 on politically motivated
charges, remained in detention at the end of
the year.
In June, police in Tamil Nadu state
arrested Dalit author Durai Guna and activist
Boopathy Karthikeyan on false charges of
assault. In July, the police arrested
environmental activists Eesan Karthik, Muthu
186
Selvan and Piyush Sethia for protesting
against the construction of a railway bridge.
Irom Sharmila ended her 16-year hunger
strike in protest against the Armed Forces
(Special Powers) Act in August. She was
released from detention and a local court
dismissed charges of attempted suicide
against her. Irom Sharmila was a prisoner of
conscience.
In October, members of the police and
security forces in Chhattisgarh burned
effigies of human rights defenders, after
some officers were charged with attacking
and burning Adivasi homes in Tadmetla,
Chhattisgarh in 2011.
JAMMU AND KASHMIR
The killing of a leader of the Hizbul
Mujahideen armed group in July sparked
widespread protests. More than 80 people,
mostly protesters, were killed in clashes and
thousands injured. At least 14 people were
killed and hundreds blinded by security
forces’ use of pellet-firing shotguns, which
are inherently inaccurate and indiscriminate.
Security forces used arbitrary or excessive
force against demonstrators on several
occasions. In August, Shabir Ahmad Monga,
a lecturer, was beaten to death by army
soldiers.
The Jammu and Kashmir government
imposed a curfew which lasted over two
months. Private landline, mobile and internet
service providers suspended their services for
weeks on orders from state authorities. The
communications shutdown undermined a
range of human rights. Residents reported
being unable to reach medical assistance in
cases of emergencies.
In July, the state government prevented
the publication of local newspapers in
Kashmir for three days. In September,
Khurram Parvez, a Kashmiri human rights
defender, was arrested and detained for over
two months on spurious grounds, a day after
he was prevented from travelling to a UN
Human Rights Council session in Geneva,
Switzerland. In October, the government
ordered a Srinagar-based newspaper to
cease printing and publication on vague
Amnesty International Report 2016/17grounds. Hundreds of people, including
children, were placed in administrative
detention. Dozens of schools were set on fire
by unidentified people.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In February, the Supreme Court referred to a
larger bench a petition challenging Section
377 of the Indian Penal Code, which
criminalizes consensual same-sex relations.
In June, five people who identified
themselves as members of the LGBTI
community filed another petition in the
Supreme Court asking for Section 377 to be
struck down.
In July, the cabinet approved a flawed bill
on transgender people’s rights. Activists
criticized the bill for its problematic definition
of transgender people, and for its provisions
on anti-discrimination which were not aligned
with a 2014 Supreme Court judgment.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Reported crimes against women and girls
continued to rise. According to statistics
released in August, over 327,000 crimes
against women were registered in 2015.
Women from marginalized communities
continued to face systemic discrimination,
making it harder for them to report sexual or
other forms of violence.
In January, two groups of Adivasi women
reported that they were raped and sexually
assaulted by security force personnel during
search operations in their villages in
Chhattisgarh. Little progress was made in
both investigations. In April, women garment
workers protesting in Bengaluru, Karnataka,
faced arbitrary and abusive actions by police.
In May, a Dalit law student from Kerala was
found raped and murdered at her home. The
police had failed to investigate previous
complaints of caste-based discrimination by
the family.
In July, the government released a flawed
draft law on trafficking without adequate
consultation. Indian law continued to
criminalize soliciting in public places, leaving
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
sex workers vulnerable to a range of human
rights abuses.
INDONESIA
Republic of Indonesia
Head of state and government: Joko Widodo
Broad and vaguely worded laws were used
to arbitrarily restrict the rights to freedom of
expression, of peaceful assembly and of
association. Despite the authorities’
commitments to resolve past cases of
human rights violations, millions of victims
and their families were still denied truth,
justice and reparation. There were reports of
human rights violations by security forces,
including unlawful killings and the use of
excessive or unnecessary force. At least 38
prisoners of conscience remained in
detention. Four people were executed.
BACKGROUND
In January, the armed group Islamic State
(IS) claimed responsibility for a series of
attacks in the capital, Jakarta, in which four
attackers and four civilians were killed. In
response, the government proposed changes
to the Anti-Terrorism Bill, which could
undermine safeguards against torture and
arbitrary detention and expand the scope of
the application of the death penalty. In July,
retired General Wiranto was appointed as Co-
ordinating Minister for Political, Law and
Security Affairs. He had been indicted for
crimes against humanity by a UN-sponsored
tribunal in Timor-Leste. He was named as a
suspect in the inquiry initiated in 1999 by the
National Commission on Human Rights
(Komnas HAM), for gross violations of human
rights in East Timor surrounding the 1999
referendum. No charges had been brought
against him by the end of the year.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Broad and vaguely worded laws continued to
arbitrarily restrict the rights to freedom of
expression, of peaceful assembly and of
187association, and of religion or belief. In July,
Yanto Awerkion and Sem Ukago, Papuan
political activists in Timika, were charged with
“rebellion” under Article 106 of the Criminal
Code. In November, prisoner of conscience
Steven Itlay, leader of the Timika branch of
the West Papuan National Committee was
sentenced to one year in prison for
“incitement” under Article 160 (see below).
Another activist from Ternate, North Maluku,
was charged with “rebellion” for posting
online a photo of a T-shirt with a caricature of
the communist hammer and sickle symbol.
In May, Ahmad Mushaddeq, Andry Cahya
and Mahful Muis Tumanurung, former
leaders of the disbanded religious group,
Gafatar, were arrested and later charged with
blasphemy under Article 156a of the Criminal
Code, and with “rebellion” under Articles 107
and 110 of the Code. They were penalized for
peacefully practising their beliefs.
Vague language in the 2008 Electronic
Information and Transaction (ITE) Law
allowed for the wide interpretation of
definitions of defamation and blasphemy, and
the criminalization of expression. Haris Azhar,
Executive Coordinator of the human rights
NGO KontraS, was threatened by the police,
the military and the National Anti-Narcotics
Agency with defamation charges under the
Law. This followed an article he published on
social media linking security and law
enforcement officials to drug trafficking and
corruption. The charges were suspended. 1 In
August, Pospera, a pro-ruling party
organization, filed a criminal defamation
complaint under the ITE Law against I Wayan
Suardana, a human rights defender from
Bali. The complaint was made in response to
I Wayan Suardana’s using Twitter to mock
supporters of a large-scale land reclamation
project by a commercial developer in Benoa
Bay, southern Bali. 2 The police were still
investigating the complaint at the end of the
year. At least 11 other activists were reported
to the police by state or non-state actors for
criminal defamation under the ITE Law after
the activists criticized government policies.
Between April and September, at least
2,200 Papuan activists were arrested after
188
participating in peaceful demonstrations in
Jayapura, Merauke, Fakfak, Sorong and
Wamena in Papua and West Papua
Provinces, in Semarang in Central Java
Province, in Makassar in South Sulawesi
Province and in Yogyakarta Province. Most
were released without charge after one day.
The arbitrary arrests highlighted the ongoing
repressive environment for political activists
in the Papua region. 3
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Discrimination increased against LGBTI
people after officials made inflammatory,
grossly inaccurate or misleading statements
in January on the grounds of “defending the
country’s public morality and public
security”. In February, police disbanded a
workshop organized by a leading LGBTI NGO
in Jakarta and prevented a pro-LGBTI rally
from taking place in Yogyakarta. 4 In the same
month, the Indonesian Broadcasting
Commission issued a letter calling for a ban
on any television or radio broadcasts
promoting LGBTI activities, to “protect the
children”.
Also in February, amid increasing anti-
LGBTI rhetoric, the Islamic school for
transgender people, Al Fatah in Yogyakarta,
was forced to close following intimidation and
threats by the Islamic Jihadist Front. In June,
the government voted against a resolution by
the UN Human Rights Council, and again at
the UN General Assembly in November, to
appoint an independent expert on violence
and discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Discriminatory legislation continued to be
used to restrict the activities of members of
minority religious groups who faced
harassment, intimidation and attacks. In
January, a mob set alight nine houses
belonging to members of the Gafatar
movement in Menpawah District, West
Kalimantan. After the attacks, at least 2,000
people were forcibly moved by local security
forces to temporary shelters in Kubu Raya
Amnesty International Report 2016/17District and Pontianak City, West Kalimantan
Province, and later transferred to locations on
Java without prior consultation.
In February, a Joint Ministerial decree (No.
93/2016) was issued by the Minister of
Religious Affairs, the Attorney General and
the Minister of Home Affairs proscribing the
Millah Abraham religious belief, adhered to
by former members of Gafatar. 5
Members of the Ahmadiyya community,
whose teachings are viewed as “deviant” by
the government, were intimidated and
threatened in various locations. 6 In February,
at least 12 members were forced to leave
their homes in Bangka Island, off the east
coast of Sumatra, after being intimidated by a
group of at least 100 local residents.
Members of the Ahmadiyya community had
been under threat of expulsion since January
when the Bangka District government issued
an order that they convert to mainstream
Sunni Islam or leave the district. Local
authorities allowed them to return after three
weeks following national and international
pressure.
IMPUNITY
In April, the government organized a
symposium on the 1965-66 mass human
rights violations that brought together
survivors, scholars, activists and artists, as
well as military and other government
officials. In October, the government
announced that it would redress the
violations using non-judicial measures to
ensure “national harmony and unity”. Victims
and NGOs raised concerns that this process
may prioritize reconciliation while abandoning
the quest for truth and justice. Authorities
continued to silence and disband activities
relating to 1965-66, including a film
screening and a cultural festival. 7
The authorities took limited steps to
address serious human rights violations. In
March, the National Human Rights
Commission completed its investigations into
the 2003 human rights violations by security
forces in Jambo Keupok village, South Aceh.
The Commission found that there was
sufficient evidence to conclude that crimes
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
against humanity occurred, as defined in Law
No.26/2000 on Human Rights Courts. The
Commission made similar findings in June in
connection with security force violations in
1999 in Simpang KKA, Dewantara sub-
district, North Aceh. No criminal
investigations or prosecutions had been
initiated by the end of the year.
In July the local Aceh provincial parliament
selected seven commissioners to the Aceh
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which
was expected to operate between 2016 and
2020. The Commission was established to
examine the circumstances which led to past
abuses during the Aceh conflict between the
Indonesian security forces and the Free Aceh
Movement, in particular between 1989
and 2004.
In September, President Widodo made a
public pledge to resolve the case of human
rights defender Munir Said Thalib. In
October, the Public Information Commission
ruled that the 2005 report into his killing,
which reportedly implicated senior
intelligence officers, should be made public.
The government appealed against the ruling.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Reports continued of unnecessary or
excessive use of force, including the use of
firearms, by police and military, and of the
lack of independent, effective and impartial
mechanisms to investigate violations by
security forces. Criminal investigations into
human rights violations by police were rare,
and attempts to hold alleged perpetrators to
account, mostly through internal disciplinary
mechanisms, left many victims without
access to justice and reparation. There was
no progress towards holding to account those
involved in the killing of four men in
December 2014 after police and military
personnel opened fire on a crowd of
protesters in Paniai regency, Papua Province.
An inquiry in March by Komnas HAM made
no progress.
In April, the then chief of the Indonesia
National Police confirmed that an alleged
terrorism suspect had died after being
assaulted and kicked by members of the
189Detachment-88 counter-terrorism unit. In
May, two members of Detachment 88
received administrative sanctions after an
internal police hearing.
In August, officers of the Mobile Brigade
(Brimob) shot dead a Papuan teenager in
Sugapa, Intan Jaya regency, Papua Province.
Otianus Sondegau and four others created a
road block to ask for money and cigarettes
from passing traffic. Police attempted to
disperse the blockade violently and fired
shots at the five teenagers at which point they
threw stones at the police. Five officers were
found guilty of “misusing firearms” after
internal disciplinary hearings; four served 21-
day prison sentences and another was
sentenced to a year in prison related to the
shooting.
In October, members of the Madiun
Infantry 501 Raider Battalion attacked a
journalist from NET TV who was covering a
brawl between members of a military unit
and a martial arts group in Madiun, East Java
Province. They beat him, destroyed his
camera’s memory card and threatened him if
he reported the incident. Despite promises by
the Armed Forces chief to investigate the
attack, no one had been held to account at
the end of the year.
PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE
At least 38 prisoners of conscience remained
in detention, many for their peaceful political
activism in Papua and Maluku. Prison
authorities delayed access to adequate and
free medical treatment to Johan Teterissa and
Ruben Saiya who were suffering long-term
health conditions. The two men were among
at least nine prisoners of conscience from
Maluku held in Java, more than 2,500km
from family and friends. Steven Itlay,
imprisoned in Timika, Papua, suffered ill
health as a result of poor conditions and was
granted only limited access to his family and
lawyer. 8
In May, three leaders of the Millah
Abraham religious group were arrested and
detained by the Indonesian National Police
and were charged with “blasphemy” under
190
Article 156a of the Criminal Code and
“rebellion” under Articles 107 and 110.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment
continued. In September, Asep Sunandar
died in police custody in Cianjur, West Java
Province. He had been arrested, with two
others, without a warrant, by three officers of
the Cianjur Resort police. He was taken to an
undisclosed location and later reported dead.
His family said that when they visited the
hospital, they saw multiple gunshot wounds
to his body and his hands still tied behind his
back. No investigation into the death is
known to have been carried out.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment
Caning was used as a punishment under
Shari’a law in Aceh for a range of criminal
offences including selling alcohol, consensual
relations, and being alone with someone of
the opposite sex who was not a marriage
partner or relative. At least 100 people were
caned during the year. The law was applied
to non-Muslims for the first time in April
when a Christian woman received 28 strokes
of the cane for selling alcohol. 9
In October, the House of Representatives
ratified Government Regulation in Lieu of Law
(Perppu) No.1/2016, which amended Article
81 of Law No.23/2002 on the Protection of
Children. The revised law imposed forced
chemical castration as an additional
punishment for those convicted of sexual
violence against a child under 18. According
to the revised law, chemical castration would
be carried out for up to two years after the
expiry of the offender’s prison term. The
Indonesian Doctors’ Association stated that it
would refuse to administer the procedure.
DEATH PENALTY
In July, one Indonesian national and three
foreign nationals were executed, three of
them while their appeals were pending. Ten
other prisoners who had been moved to Nusa
Kambangan Island, where the executions
took place, were given last-minute stays of
execution to allow for a review of their cases.
Amnesty International Report 2016/171. Indonesia: Defamation investigation suspended (ASA 21/4734/2016)
2. Indonesia: Defender under investigation for defamation (ASA
21/4833/2016)
3. Indonesia: End mass arrests and crackdowns on peaceful protests
(ASA 21/3948/2016)
4. Indonesia: Stop inflammatory and discriminatory statements that put
the LGBTI community at risk (ASA 21/3648/2016)
5. Indonesia: Authorities must repeal joint ministerial decree (ASA
21/3787/2016)
6. Indonesia: Religious minority members forcibly evicted (ASA
21/3409/2016)
7. Indonesia: President must not undermine efforts to seek truth, justice
and reparation (ASA 21/3671/2016)
8. Indonesia: Poor prison conditions for Papuan activist (ASA
21/4085/2016)
9. Indonesia: End caning as a punishment in Aceh (ASA 21/3853/2016)
IRAN
Islamic Republic of Iran
Head of state: Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei (Supreme
Leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran)
Head of government: Hassan Rouhani (President)
The authorities heavily suppressed the
rights to freedom of expression, association,
peaceful assembly and religious belief,
arresting and imprisoning peaceful critics
and others after grossly unfair trials before
Revolutionary Courts. Torture and other ill-
treatment of detainees remained common
and widespread, and were committed with
impunity. Floggings, amputations and other
cruel punishments continued to be applied.
Members of religious and ethnic minorities
faced discrimination and persecution.
Women and girls faced pervasive violence
and discrimination. The authorities made
extensive use of the death penalty, carrying
out hundreds of executions, some in public.
At least two juvenile offenders were
executed.
BACKGROUND
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Iran. The government continued to deny
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
the Special Rapporteur entry to Iran and to
prevent access by other UN human rights
experts.
The government and the EU discussed
initiating a renewed bilateral human rights
dialogue.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
conducted its third and fourth periodic review
of Iran and criticized continued executions of
juvenile offenders, and the impact of public
executions on the mental health of children
who witnessed them. The Committee also
criticized continued discrimination against
girls; children of religious and ethnic
minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) children; and the low
age at which girls in particular become
criminally liable.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities cracked down further on the
rights to freedom of expression, association
and peaceful assembly, arbitrarily arresting
and imprisoning peaceful critics on vague
national security charges. Those targeted
included human rights defenders, journalists,
lawyers, bloggers, students, trade union
activists, film makers, musicians, poets,
women’s rights activists, ethnic and religious
minority rights activists, and environmental
and anti-death penalty campaigners.
As the year closed, many prisoners of
conscience undertook hunger strikes to
protest against their unjust imprisonment,
exposing the abusive nature of Iran’s criminal
justice system.
The authorities intensified their repression
of human rights defenders, sentencing them
to long prison terms for their peaceful
activities. Courts increasingly cited criticism
of Iran’s human rights record on social media
and communicating with international human
rights mechanisms, particularly the UN
Special Rapporteur on Iran and human rights
organizations based abroad including
Amnesty International as evidence of
191“criminal” activism deemed threatening to
national security.
The authorities also cracked down on
musical expression, disrupting and forcibly
cancelling performances, including some
licensed by the Ministry of Culture and
Islamic Guidance; and repressed activities
such as private mixed-gender parties that
they deemed “socially perverse” or “un-
Islamic”, arresting hundreds and sentencing
many to flogging.
Opposition leaders Mehdi Karroubi and
Mir Hossein Mousavi and the latter’s wife,
Zahra Rahnavard, remained under house
arrest without charge since 2011. They were
subject to frequent extreme intrusions on
their privacy and inadequate access to
medical care.
The authorities continued to censor all
media, jamming foreign satellite TV
broadcasts, closing or suspending
newspapers including Bahar and Ghanoun
and forcing the women’s rights magazine
Zanan-e Emrooz to suspend publication.
In February, a judicial order added
WhatsApp, Line and Tango to the list of
blocked social media sites, which already
included Facebook and Twitter. The Cyber
Crime Unit of the Revolutionary Guards
blocked or closed down hundreds of
Telegram and Instagram accounts and
arrested or summoned for interrogation the
administrators of more than 450 groups and
channels in Telegram, WhatsApp and
Instagram, including several hundred fashion
designers and employees of fashion
boutiques, as part of a massive crackdown
on social media activities deemed
“threatening to moral security”.
The suspended Association of Iranian
Journalists addressed an open letter to
President Rouhani urging him,
unsuccessfully, to honour his 2013 election
campaign pledge to lift its suspension, while
92 student groups urged the President to
release universities from the grip of fear and
repression. The authorities did not permit the
Teachers’ Trade Association of Iran to renew
its licence, and sentenced several of its
members to long prison terms on charges
192
that included “membership of an illegal
group”.
The authorities continued to suppress
peaceful protests and subject protesters to
beatings and arbitrary detention. Numerous
individuals remained convicted of “gathering
and colluding against national security” for
attending peaceful protests.
A new Law on Political Crimes, which was
adopted in January and took effect in June,
criminalized all expression deemed to be
“against the management of the country and
its political institutions and domestic and
foreign policies” and made “with intent to
reform the affairs of the country without
intending to harm the basis of the
establishment”.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees
remained common, especially during
interrogation, and was used primarily to force
“confessions”. Detainees held by the Ministry
of Intelligence and the Revolutionary Guards
were routinely subjected to prolonged solitary
confinement amounting to torture.
The authorities systematically failed to
investigate allegations of torture and other ill-
treatment, sometimes threatening to subject
complainants to further torture and harsh
sentences. Judges continued to admit
“confessions” obtained under torture as
evidence against the defendant, although
such confessions were inadmissible under
the 2015 Code of Criminal Procedure. The
Code failed to set out the procedure that
judges and prosecutors must follow to
investigate allegations of torture and ensure
that confessions were made voluntarily. Other
provisions of the Code, such as the provision
guaranteeing the detainee’s right to access a
lawyer from the time of arrest and during the
investigation stage, were frequently ignored in
practice, facilitating torture.
Judicial authorities, particularly the Office
of the Prosecutor, and prison authorities
frequently denied access to adequate
medical care for political prisoners, including
prisoners of conscience. This was often done
Amnesty International Report 2016/17to punish prisoners or to coerce
“confessions”.
In June, detainee Nader Dastanpour died
in custody as a result of injuries that his
family said were inflicted during torture at a
Tehran police station. No independent
investigation was reported.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment
Judicial authorities continued to impose and
carry out cruel, inhuman or degrading
punishments that amounted to torture,
including floggings, blindings and
amputations. These were sometimes carried
out in public.
In April, the Public Prosecutor of
Golpayegan, Esfahan Province, announced
that a man and woman convicted of “having
an illegitimate relationship” had been
sentenced to 100 lashes each.
In May, the Public Prosecutor of Qazvin
Province announced that the authorities had
arrested 35 young women and men “dancing
and mingling at a graduation party... while
half-naked and consuming alcohol” and
convicted them within 24 hours of engaging
in acts “incompatible with chastity which
disturbed the public opinion”. The authorities
carried out the 99-lash floggings to which
they were sentenced at a special court
hearing the same day.
In West Azerbaijan Province, authorities
carried out flogging sentences of between 30
and 100 lashes against 17 miners who had
engaged in a protest against employment
conditions and dismissals at the Agh Darreh
gold mine in 2014. In June, a criminal court
in Yazd Province sentenced nine miners to
floggings ranging from 30 to 50 lashes.
In July, an appeal court sentenced
journalist and blogger Mohammad Reza Fathi
to 459 lashes on charges of “publishing lies”
and “creating unease in the public mind”
through his writings.
In November, a man was forcibly blinded
in both eyes in Tehran, in retribution for
blinding a four-year-old girl in June 2009.
Several other prisoners including Mojtaba
Yasaveli and Hossein Zareyian remained at
risk of being forcibly blinded. Doctors
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
associated with the official Legal Medicine
Organization of Iran provided the Supreme
Court with “expert” advice on how the
implementation of blinding sentences was
medically feasible, an act that breached
medical ethics.
In April, judicial authorities at Mashhad
Central Prison amputated four fingers from
the right hand and the toes from the left foot
of a man convicted of armed robbery. The
same authorities amputated the fingers of
another man convicted of robbery in May. In
August, a judicial official in Tehran
announced that several men had appealed
after they were sentenced to amputation of
four fingers from one hand. In December,
judicial authorities at Urumieh Central Prison
amputated four fingers from the right hands
of two brothers convicted of armed robbery.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Trials, including those resulting in death
sentences, were generally unfair. The
judiciary was not independent. The Special
Court for the Clergy and the Revolutionary
Courts remained particularly susceptible to
pressure from security and intelligence forces
to convict defendants and impose harsh
sentences.
Officials exercising judicial powers,
including from the Ministry of Intelligence
and Revolutionary Guards, consistently
flouted due process provisions of the 2015
Code of Criminal Procedure. These included
provisions protecting the right to access a
lawyer from the time of arrest and during
investigations and the right to remain silent.
Defence lawyers were frequently denied full
access to case files and prevented from
meeting defendants until shortly before trial.
Pre-trial detainees were frequently held in
prolonged solitary confinement, with little or
no access to their families and lawyers.
“Confessions” extracted under torture were
used as evidence at trial. Judges often failed
to deliver reasoned judgments and the
judiciary did not make court judgments
publicly available.
The Office of the Prosecutor used Article
48 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to
193prevent detainees accessing lawyers of their
own choosing, telling them that they were not
on the list of lawyers approved by the Head of
the Judiciary, even though no official list had
been issued.
Several foreign nationals and Iranians with
dual nationality were detained in Tehran’s
Evin Prison with little or no access to their
families, lawyers and consular officials. These
prisoners were sentenced to long prison
terms on vague charges such as
“collaborating with a hostile government”
after grossly unfair trials before Revolutionary
Courts. The authorities accused the prisoners
of being involved in a foreign-orchestrated
“infiltration project” pursuing the “soft
overthrow” of Iran. In reality, the convictions
appeared to stem from their peaceful
exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression and association.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Members of religious minorities, including
Baha’is, Sufis, Yaresan (Ahl-e Haq), Christian
converts and Sunni Muslims, faced
discrimination in law and practice, including
in education, employment and inheritance,
and were persecuted for practising their faith.
The authorities engaged in hate speech
and allowed hate crimes to be committed
with impunity against Baha’is, and
imprisoned scores of Baha’is on trumped-up
national security charges imposed for
peacefully practising their religious beliefs.
Allegations of torture of 24 Baha’is in
Golestan Province were not investigated. The
authorities forcibly closed down dozens of
Baha’i-owned businesses and detained
Baha’i students who publicly criticized the
authorities for denying them access to higher
education.
The authorities detained tens of Christian
converts after raiding house churches where
they peacefully gathered to worship. Sites
considered sacred by Baha’is, Sunni Muslims
and Yaresan, including cemeteries and
places of worship, were destroyed by men
believed to be affiliated with security forces.
Spiritual teacher Mohammad Ali Taheri
remained in solitary confinement in Section
194
2A of Evin Prison despite completing, in
February, a five-year sentence for “insulting
Islamic sanctities” for establishing the Erfan-e
Halgheh spiritual doctrine and group. His
followers continued to be arbitrarily arrested
and detained.
DISCRIMINATION – ETHNIC MINORITIES
Iran’s disadvantaged ethnic minorities,
including Ahwazi Arabs, Azerbaijani Turks,
Baluchis, Kurds and Turkmen, remained
subject to entrenched discrimination,
curtailing their access to employment,
adequate housing, political office, and their
exercise of cultural, civil and political rights.
Continued economic neglect of minority-
populated regions by state authorities further
entrenched poverty and the marginalization
of ethnic minorities.
Members of minorities who spoke out
against violations of their political, cultural
and linguistic rights faced arbitrary arrest,
torture and other ill-treatment, grossly unfair
trials, imprisonment, and in some cases the
death penalty.
Dozens of Kurds were reportedly arrested
without warrant for their real or perceived
affiliations with the Kurdish Democratic Party
of Iran after it renewed armed opposition to
the Iranian authorities in March. Scores of
Kurds served prison sentences or remained
under sentence of death for membership of
or sympathy with banned Kurdish opposition
groups.
Ahwazi Arabs were imprisoned and
subjected to torture and other human rights
violations. They complained that the
authorities repressed expressions of Arabic
culture, including dress and poetry.
Security forces continued to repress
protests by ethnic minorities. In July and
August, they detained several members of
the Azerbaijani Turkish ethnic group after
largely peaceful demonstrations in several
cities sparked by a report in the newspaper
Tarheh No which Azerbaijani Turks deemed
offensive. Police also beat protesters.
The authorities continued to prohibit
ethnic minority groups from using their own
language in primary education. In June the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17government announced that optional Turkish
and Kurdish language courses would be
offered in schools in two provinces, Kurdistan
and West Azerbaijan, although
implementation remained unclear. Members
of the Turkmen minority publicly appealed to
President Rouhani for a similar dispensation.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The authorities renewed their crackdown on
women human rights defenders and
increasingly likened any collective initiative
relating to feminism and women’s rights to
criminal activity. Women’s rights activists who
had campaigned for greater representation of
women in the February parliamentary
elections were subjected by the Revolutionary
Guards to lengthy, oppressive interrogations,
and threats of imprisonment on national
security charges.
Women remained subject to pervasive
discrimination in law and practice, including
in access to divorce, employment, equal
inheritance and political office and in the
area of criminal law.
Several draft laws that would further erode
women’s right to sexual and reproductive
health remained pending. Women continued
to have reduced access to affordable modern
contraception as the authorities failed to
restore the budget of the state family
planning programme cut in 2012.
In September, Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei issued national family policies
promoting early marriage, repeated
childbearing, fewer divorces and greater
compliance to “traditional” roles of women as
housewives and men as breadwinners. The
policies raised concern that women victims of
domestic violence may face further
marginalization and increased pressure to
“reconcile” with abusers and remain in
abusive marital relationships.
Women and girls remained inadequately
protected against sexual and other gender-
based violence, including early and forced
marriage. The authorities failed to adopt laws
criminalizing these and other abuses,
including marital rape and domestic violence,
although the Vice-President on Women and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Family Affairs pushed a draft bill that had
been pending since 2012.
Compulsory “veiling” (hijab) laws, which
violated women’s rights to equality, privacy,
and freedoms of expression, belief and
religion, continued to empower police and
paramilitary forces to target women for
harassment, violence, and imprisonment.
DEATH PENALTY
The authorities continued to use the death
penalty extensively, including against juvenile
offenders. Hundreds of executions were
carried out after unfair trials. Some
executions were conducted in public.
Those executed were mostly sentenced for
drugs offences that did not meet the
threshold of “most serious crimes” under
international human rights law. The Supreme
Court ruled that those sentenced for drugs
offences prior to the adoption of the 2015
Code of Criminal Procedure had the right to
appeal, but many death row prisoners
remained unaware of this development.
Others were sentenced for murder, or on
vague offences such as “enmity against
God”.
Following the mass execution of 25 Sunni
men in August, the authorities broadcast
forced “confession” videos, apparently to
demonize the men and divert attention from
the deeply flawed trials that led to their death
sentences. At least two men convicted of
“insulting the Prophet” received death
sentences, in violation of their rights to life
and freedoms of belief, religion and
expression.
At least 78 juvenile offenders remained on
death row. They included 15 juvenile
offenders who were sentenced to death for
the first time under the revised juvenile
sentencing guidelines of the 2013 Islamic
Penal Code as well as several who again
received death sentences after they were
retried.
Amnesty International was able to confirm
the execution of two juvenile offenders during
the year, among them Hassan Afshar,
although the total number could be much
higher.
195The Islamic Penal Code continued to
provide for stoning as a method of execution;
at least one woman, Fariba Khaleghi,
remained under a sentence of death by
stoning.
Some consensual same-sex sexual
conduct remained punishable by death.
IRAQ
Republic of Iraq
Head of state: Fuad Masum
Head of government: Haider al-Abadi
Government forces, paramilitary militias
and the armed group Islamic State (IS)
committed war crimes, other violations of
international humanitarian law and gross
human rights abuses in the internal armed
conflict. IS fighters carried out execution-
style killings targeting opponents and
civilians fleeing IS-held territory, raped and
otherwise tortured captives, used civilians
as human shields and used child soldiers.
Militias extrajudicially executed, forcibly
disappeared and tortured civilians fleeing
conflict, and destroyed homes and other
civilian property. Thousands remained
detained without trial on suspicion of links
to IS. Torture in detention remained rife.
Courts sentenced terrorism suspects to
death, frequently after unfair trials.
Executions continued at a high rate.
BACKGROUND
Armed conflict continued between IS and an
array of Iraqi government forces, paramilitary
militias and Peshmerga (Kurdish armed
forces), supported by US-led international
coalition air strikes. IS held areas of
northwestern and western Iraq, but lost
significant territory during the year, including
Falluja in June, al-Qayyara in August and
Sharqat in September. Military operations to
recapture Mosul, the largest remaining IS
stronghold, were continuing at the end of the
year.
The armed conflict, car bombings and
other violence led to 6,878 fatalities and
196
12,388 injuries among civilians during the
year, according to the UN.
Prime Minister al-Abadi issued Order 91 in
February and Parliament passed a law in
November designating the Popular
Mobilization Units (PMU), established in
June 2014 and comprising mostly Shi’a
paramilitary militias, as a “military formation
and part of the Iraqi armed forces”.
In August, Parliament passed the General
Amnesty Law. It did not cover certain types of
crimes, such as terrorist acts that resulted in
death or permanent injury; but it provided a
right of judicial review for those convicted
under the Anti-Terrorism Law and other laws
in cases where court verdicts were based on
“confessions” extracted under “duress”.
Anti-government protesters calling for
institutional reform and an end to corruption
twice breached the heavily fortified Green
Zone, where the government is based, in the
capital Baghdad. On the second occasion, 20
May, government forces fired tear gas, rubber
bullets and stun grenades to disperse
protesters, leading to four deaths. The
authorities announced an investigation but
disclosed no information about its outcome or
any prosecutions. A proposed law restricting
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was tabled for discussion by Parliament in
July, but withdrawn following a public outcry.
The remaining Iranian political exiles, who
were residents of Camp Liberty in Baghdad,
were resettled outside Iraq by late
September. On 4 July, the camp had come
under rocket attack leading to injuries and
material damage.
ARMED CONFLICT – VIOLATIONS BY
MILITIAS AND GOVERNMENT FORCES
Paramilitary militias and government forces
committed war crimes and other violations of
international humanitarian law and human
rights law, mostly against members of the
Sunni Arab community. They carried out
extrajudicial executions, other unlawful
killings and torture, forcibly disappeared
hundreds of men and boys, and deliberately
destroyed homes and property.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Following a suicide bombing that killed 27
men and injured 41 others in Muqdadiya on
11 January, militias carried out revenge
attacks against the Sunni community,
abducting and killing dozens of men and
burning and destroying Sunni mosques,
shops and other property.
On 3 June, PMU militias abducted an
estimated 1,300 men and boys fleeing
Saqlawiya, north of Falluja. Three days later,
605 men reappeared bearing marks of
torture, while the fate of 643 remained
unknown. An investigative committee
established by the Governor of Anbar found
that 49 had been killed by being shot,
tortured or burned to death. On 30 May, at
least 12 men and four boys who were fleeing
al-Sijir, north of Falluja, were extrajudicially
executed. Prime Minister al-Abadi
established a committee to investigate
abuses, but the authorities did not disclose
any outcome or report any criminal process
against the perpetrators.
The PMU and Tribal Mobilization militias,
composed of Sunni fighters, were reported to
have recruited children and used them in
fighting against IS.
The authorities took no steps to clarify the
whereabouts and fate of thousands of Sunni
Arab men and boys who remained forcibly
disappeared after being seized from their
homes, at checkpoints, and from camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) by militias
and government forces in previous years.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
IS killed and injured civilians throughout Iraq
in suicide bombings and other deadly attacks
that were indiscriminate or deliberately
targeted civilians in crowded markets, Shi’a
religious shrines and other public spaces. IS
particularly targeted locations within
Baghdad.
A series of attacks in May across Baghdad,
mainly in predominantly Shi’a
neighbourhoods, killed 150 people and
injured 214, mostly civilians, according to
officials and media reports.
In areas under its control, IS fighters
carried out execution-style killings of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
perceived opponents and those suspected of
collaborating with government forces. IS
fighters carried out abductions, including of
civilians, and systematically tortured captives.
IS imposed a draconian code of conduct and
severely punished infractions. Its self-
declared “courts” ordered stoning for
“adultery” and floggings and other corporal
punishments against inhabitants for smoking,
failing to adhere to the IS-imposed dress
code or other IS rules. IS imposed severe
restrictions on the use of telephones and the
internet and on women’s freedom of
movement. IS prevented civilians from fleeing
areas it controlled, and used civilians as
human shields. Fighters shot at those
attempting to escape, destroyed their
property and carried out revenge attacks
against relatives left behind. The group
indoctrinated and recruited boys, including
Yazidi captives, using them in battles and
suicide attacks. In October, IS used chemical
weapons to attack the town of al-Qayyara
after it had been recaptured by Iraqi forces,
leading to burns and other injuries among
civilians.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women and girls faced discrimination in law
and practice, and were inadequately
protected from sexual and other gender-
based violence. An estimated 3,500 Yazidis
captured in Iraq remained in IS captivity in
Iraq and Syria and were subjected to rape
and other torture, assault and enslavement.
Those who managed to escape or were freed
after their relatives paid ransoms received
inadequate psychological and material
support; several committed or attempted
suicide.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
All males considered to be of fighting age
(roughly 15 to 65) fleeing territories
controlled by IS underwent security
screenings by security forces at makeshift
detention facilities or temporary reception
sites, where they were held for days or
months in often dire conditions. Those
suspected of terrorism were transferred into
197the custody of security agencies such as the
Anti-Crime Directorate or Anti-Terrorism
Directorate, or the General Intelligence
branch of the Ministry of the Interior, where
they were at risk of torture and other ill-
treatment and frequently denied contact with
families and lawyers.
Security forces and militias arrested
alleged terrorism suspects without judicial
warrant from their homes, checkpoints and
IDP camps, failing to inform those taken or
their relatives of any charges. Many were
held in prolonged incommunicado detention,
in some cases in conditions amounting to
enforced disappearance, in facilities
controlled by the Ministries of the Interior and
Defence or secret detention centres, where
they were interrogated by security officers
without lawyers present. Thousands
remained in detention without appearing
before judicial authorities or being referred
for trial.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained rife
in prisons, detention centres controlled by
the Ministries of the Interior and Defence,
and militia-controlled facilities. The most
frequently reported methods of torture used
against detainees were beatings on the head
and body with metal rods and cables,
suspension in stress positions by the arms or
legs, electric shocks and threats of rape of
female relatives. Torture appeared to be
carried out to extract “confessions”, obtain
information and punish detainees. Several
detainees died in custody as a result of
torture.
In October, Tribal Mobilization fighters
subjected villagers from south of Mosul,
suspected of links to IS, to beatings with
metal cables, public humiliation and use of
electric-shock weapons.
UNFAIR TRIALS
The criminal justice system remained deeply
flawed and trials were systematically unfair.
Defendants, in particular terrorism suspects,
were routinely denied the rights to adequate
defence, to not incriminate oneself or confess
198
guilt and to cross-examine prosecution
witnesses. Courts continued to admit into
evidence torture-tainted “confessions”
without ordering investigations into
defendants’ claims or referring them for
forensic examination. Some of those
convicted after unfair trials were sentenced to
death.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
More than 3.1 million people remained
internally displaced across Iraq, sheltering
with host communities or in IDP camps,
informal settlements, and buildings under
construction. Many were destitute and lived
in dire conditions, while humanitarian
agencies reported significant shortfalls in
international funding. Thousands fled across
the border to Syria.
The Iraqi authorities and those of the semi-
autonomous Kurdistan Regional Government
(KRG) imposed arbitrary and discriminatory
restrictions on the freedom of movement of
Sunni Arab IDPs. Tens of thousands
remained confined to camps with no access
to the job market or essential services
because they were without local sponsors
and therefore unable to obtain the official
permits required to enter cities.
Tens of thousands of IDPs were able to
return home to areas that government and
allied forces recaptured from IS, including
the cities of Ramadi and Falluja, after
completing onerous security checks.
However, tens of thousands of Sunni Arab
IDPs from areas recaptured from IS in Babil,
Diyala and Salah al-Din governorates were
prevented from returning home through a
mix of onerous bureaucratic procedures, and
intimidation tactics by militias, including
abductions, arbitrary detention and
extrajudicial executions. Relatives of
suspected IS fighters were barred from
returning and some had their homes
deliberately destroyed or appropriated.
Peshmerga and other Kurdish security forces
also prevented tens of thousands of Arab
residents of KRG-controlled areas, displaced
by the conflict, from returning home.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
MEDIA WORKERS
Journalists worked in a dangerous and at
times deadly environment, and reported
physical assaults, abduction, intimidation,
harassment and death threats for covering
topics deemed sensitive, including corruption
and militia abuses.
Media workers Saif Talal and Hassan al-
Anbaki from the al-Sharkia TV channel were
shot dead on 12 January in northwestern
Diyala while returning from covering a suicide
bombing in Muqdadiya and revenge attacks
by militias targeting Sunni Arabs. The
channel accused unidentified militiamen, but
the authorities failed to adequately investigate
the killing of the media workers.
In April, the Iraqi Communications and
Media Commission shut down al-Jazeera’s
Baghdad bureau, accusing the channel of
“incit[ing] sectarianism and violence”. In
March, the authorities closed the Baghdadia
TV Channel’s offices in Iraq purportedly for
operating illegally without a licence. The
channel had published articles on
government corruption and pro-reform
protests, and had been subjected to several
closures in recent years.
KURDISTAN REGION OF IRAQ
Media workers, activists and politicians
critical of the ruling Kurdistan Democratic
Party (KDP) faced harassment and threats
and some were expelled from Erbil
governorate. No progress was made in
conducting investigations into the killings in
previous years of journalists and other
perceived critics and opponents of the
Kurdish authorities.
On 13 August, relatives collected the body
of Wedad Hussein Ali, a journalist who
worked for a publication seen as supporting
the Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK). The body
bore injuries indicating that he had been
tortured, including deep lacerations to the
head. Witnesses told his family that he had
been found alive earlier that day in a village
west of Dohuk after unidentified men seized
him from the street at gunpoint. His family
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
and co-workers reported that he was
previously questioned by the Asayish
(security forces) in Dohuk and had received
death threats. The authorities announced an
investigation two days after his killing but had
disclosed no outcome by the end of the year.
Asayish and other Kurdish security forces
detained thousands of terrorism suspects,
mainly Sunni Arab men and boys, amid
severe delays in referring them to the
judiciary, denial of family visits for prolonged
periods of time, and other breaches of due
process. In October, the KRG authorities said
that the Asayish Ghishti (General Security
Agency) and the Asayish branch in Erbil had
arrested 2,801 terrorism suspects since the
beginning of the year.
Bassema Darwish, a Yazidi survivor of IS
captivity, remained detained without trial in
Erbil since her arrest in October 2014 in the
town of Zummar when it was recaptured by
Peshmerga forces from IS. The authorities
accused her of complicity in the killing of
three Peshmerga officials, but denied her the
right to a lawyer of her own choosing and
failed to conduct an independent
investigation into allegations that General
Security Directorate officials in Dohuk
tortured her after her arrest.
Courts in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
continued to pass death sentences for
terrorism-related offences; no executions
were carried out.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts sentenced dozens to death by
hanging; scores of executions were carried
out. Public and political pressure on the
authorities to execute “terrorists” mounted
following a suicide bombing in the Karrada
neighbourhood of Baghdad on 2 July that
killed nearly 300 people, mostly civilians. A
militia leader threatened to kill death row
inmates at Nasriya Prison if the government
failed to act. On 12 July, President Masum
ratified a law amending the Code of Criminal
Procedures to limit the possibility of retrials,
aimed at speeding up the execution process.
On 21 August, the government announced
the execution of 36 men convicted of
199participating in the massacre by IS fighters of
up to 1,700 Shi’a cadets at the Speicher
military training camp in June 2014, after
President Masum ratified their death
sentences. They were convicted after a trial
of only a few hours’ duration marred by
breaches of the right to a fair trial, including
the court’s failure to adequately investigate
the defendants’ allegations that their pre-trial
“confessions” were extracted under torture.
IRELAND
Republic of Ireland
Head of state: Michael D. Higgins
Head of government: Enda Kenny
Access to and information about abortion
remained severely restricted and
criminalized. Travellers’ rights to adequate
housing were violated. Concerns remained
about “direct provision” accommodation
provided to asylum-seekers.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In February, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child expressed concern that
legislation allowed abortion only where a girl’s
life is at “real and substantial risk”, and
prevented doctors from providing services in
accordance with objective medical practice.
The Committee called on Ireland to
decriminalize abortion in all circumstances
and review its legislation to ensure children’s
access to safe abortion and post-abortion
care. It also found a “severe lack of access to
sexual and reproductive health education
and emergency contraception for
adolescents”.
In June, the UN Human Rights Committee
decided in Mellet v Ireland that Ireland’s
abortion laws violated a woman’s right to be
free from inhuman or degrading treatment,
and to enjoy privacy and non-discrimination.
The complainant had to travel to the UK for
an abortion, despite a diagnosis of a fatal
fetal impairment causing her “intense
physical and mental suffering”. The
Committee found that the suffering was
200
exacerbated by the stigma caused by the
criminalization of abortion. On 30 November,
the government agreed to provide the
complainant, Amanda Mellet, with
compensation and counselling.
A Citizens’ Assembly, comprising 99
randomly selected members of the public
and established by the government to make
recommendations on constitutional reform,
including on abortion, held its first meetings
in October and November.
HOUSING RIGHTS
In January, the government referred the right
to housing to a parliamentary committee,
responding partially to the 2014
recommendation of the government-
established Constitutional Convention.
However, it chose not to task the same
committee with examining the full
recommendation that the Constitution be
amended to incorporate economic, social
and cultural rights. This was despite the fact
that as recently as 2015 the UN Committee
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
reiterated its recommendation that the
government take all appropriate measures to
ensure the direct applicability of provisions in
the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, including through
incorporation of the Covenant in its domestic
legal order.
The shortage of state housing and private
rental accommodation contributed to
homelessness. The Committee on the Rights
of the Child expressed deep concern at
reports that homeless families experienced
significant delays in accessing social housing,
frequently living long-term in inappropriate,
temporary or emergency accommodation.
DISCRIMINATION
Travellers and Roma
In May, the European Committee of Social
Rights ruled, in European Roma Rights
Centre v Ireland, that Travellers faced a
violation of their right to social, legal and
economic protection on the grounds of
insufficient provision of accommodation, poor
conditions of many sites and inadequate
Amnesty International Report 2016/17safeguards when threatened with and during
evictions.
The UN Committee on the Rights of the
Child raised concerns over structural
discrimination against Traveller and Roma
children, including in their access to
education, health and an adequate standard
of living.
Sex workers
A government bill which proposed to
criminalize the purchase of sex, fails to take
adequate account of sex workers’ needs and
views or international evidence that
criminalization increases their isolation and
marginalization, and violates their safety and
human rights. The bill did not fully
decriminalize sex workers but maintained
and even increased penalties for brothel-
keeping and loitering offences that are
frequently used against sex workers.
REFUGEES’ AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS’
RIGHTS
Provisions in 2015 legislation which
established a single procedure for dealing
with both claims for refugee status and other
forms of protection came into force on 31
December.
Concerns remained about the poor living
conditions in “direct provision”
accommodation centres for asylum-seekers
and the slow implementation of
recommendations for improvement set out in
a government-established working group’s
2015 report. Concerns highlighted by the
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child,
included inadequate child protection
services, access to education, and
inappropriate clothing and food.
Resettlement and relocation
The Department of Justice and Equality
confirmed that by the end of the year, only
240 of the 2,622 asylum-seekers agreed for
relocation from the EU in 2015 had arrived in
Ireland; 519 of 520 Syrian refugees agreed
for resettlement from the Middle East,
however, had arrived. In July, Ireland
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
undertook to resettle another 260 refugees
from Lebanon.
National security deportation
In July, the authorities deported a man to
Jordan, deeming him a national security
threat for allegedly organizing and facilitating
travel of people to join the armed group
Islamic State (IS). He faced the risk of torture
and other ill-treatment in Jordan. His
applications to the Irish courts and the
European Court of Human Rights to prevent
his deportation were unsuccessful. 1
1. Ireland: Deportation to Jordan would risk backsliding on absolute ban
on torture (News story, 6 July)
ISRAEL AND THE
OCCUPIED
PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES
State of Israel
Head of state: Reuven Rivlin
Head of government: Benjamin Netanyahu
Israeli forces unlawfully killed Palestinian
civilians, including children, in both Israel
and the Occupied Palestinian Territories
(OPT), and detained thousands of
Palestinians from the OPT who opposed
Israel’s continuing military occupation,
holding hundreds in administrative
detention. Torture and other ill-treatment of
detainees remained rife and was committed
with impunity. The authorities continued to
promote illegal settlements in the West
Bank, including by attempting to
retroactively “legalize” settlements built on
private Palestinian land, and severely
restricted Palestinians’ freedom of
movement, closing some areas after attacks
by Palestinians on Israelis. Israeli forces
continued to blockade the Gaza Strip,
201subjecting its population of 1.9 million to
collective punishment, and to demolish
homes of Palestinians in the West Bank and
of Bedouin villagers in Israel’s Negev/Naqab
region, forcibly evicting residents. The
authorities imprisoned conscientious
objectors to military service and detained
and deported thousands of asylum-seekers
from Africa.
BACKGROUND
Israeli-Palestinian relations remained tense.
International efforts to revive negotiations
failed, with Israel continuing to develop illegal
settlements on territory it occupied. In
December the UN Security Council passed a
resolution calling on Israel to cease all
settlement activities in the West Bank.
In June the government announced a
reconciliation agreement between Israel and
Turkey which saw the two countries restore
diplomatic relations. Israel agreed to pay
compensation to the families of Turkish
citizens killed by Israeli forces when they
intercepted the humanitarian aid ship Mavi
Marmara in 2010.
In September the government of the USA
agreed to increase its military aid to Israel to
$3.8 billion annually for 10 years from 2019.
The year saw stabbing, car-ramming,
shooting and other attacks by Palestinians on
Israelis in the West Bank and in Israel. The
attacks, mostly carried out by Palestinians
unaffiliated to armed groups, killed 16 Israelis
and one foreign national, mostly civilians.
Israeli forces killed 110 Palestinians and two
foreign nationals during the year. Some were
killed unlawfully while posing no threat to life.
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza
periodically fired indiscriminate rockets and
mortars into Israel, without causing deaths or
serious injuries. Israeli forces responded with
air strikes and artillery fire, killing three
Palestinian civilians, including two children,
in Gaza.
202
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT – GAZA
BLOCKADE AND WEST BANK
RESTRICTIONS
Israel’s military blockade of the Gaza Strip
entered its 10th year, continuing the
collective punishment of Gaza’s entire
population. Israeli controls on the movement
of people and goods into and from Gaza,
combined with Egypt’s almost total closure of
the Rafah border crossing and funding
shortages, damaged Gaza’s economy and
hindered post-conflict reconstruction. Some
51,000 people were still displaced from the
2014 war, and unexploded ordnance from
that conflict continued to cause civilian
deaths and injuries. The number of
Palestinians leaving Gaza via the Erez
Crossing declined during the year, as the
Israeli authorities denied, delayed or revoked
permits for businesspeople, staff of
international organizations, and medical
patients and their companions.
Israeli forces maintained a “buffer zone”
inside Gaza’s border with Israel and used live
fire and other weapons against Palestinians
who entered or approached it, killing four and
wounding others. Israeli forces also fired at
Palestinian fishermen in or near the
“exclusion zone” that they maintained along
Gaza’s coastline.
In the West Bank, the Israeli authorities
severely restricted the movement of
Palestinians on a discriminatory basis,
particularly around illegal Israeli settlements
and near the fence/wall. In response to
Palestinian attacks on Israelis, the military
authorities imposed collective punishment,
revoking permits of attackers’ family
members to work in Israel and closing off
entire areas and villages.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities detained or continued to
imprison thousands of Palestinians from the
OPT, holding most of them in prisons in
Israel, in violation of international law. Many
prisoners’ families, particularly those in Gaza,
were not permitted entry to Israel to visit their
relatives in prison. The Israeli authorities
Amnesty International Report 2016/17continued to arrest hundreds of Palestinian
children in the West Bank including East
Jerusalem. Many were subjected to abuse by
Israeli forces including beatings and threats.
The authorities held hundreds of
Palestinians, including children, under
renewable administrative detention orders
based on information that they withheld from
the detainees and their lawyers. The
numbers held under such orders since
October 2015 were the highest since 2007;
more than 694 were held at the end of April
2016 (the last month for which reliable data
was available). Some detainees undertook
lengthy protest hunger strikes; Palestinian
detainee Bilal Kayed remained on hunger
strike for 71 days. He was released without
charge in December. Anas Shadid and
Ahmad Abu Farah ended their hunger strike
on 22 December after 90 days without food.
Three Israeli Jews held as administrative
detainees were released.
The authorities gave circus performer
Mohammed Faisal Abu Sakha two additional
six-month administrative detention orders in
June and December, based on secret
evidence. His first six-month detention order
had been issued in December 2015.
Palestinians from the West Bank who were
charged with protest-related and other
offences faced unfair military trials, while
Israeli civilian courts trying Palestinians from
the Gaza Strip issued harsh sentences, even
for minor offences.
Mohammed al-Halabi, a Gaza-based
humanitarian worker, was denied access to
his lawyer and interrogated intensively for
three weeks after his arrest in June. He was
charged in August with embezzling money
from the charity World Vision and passing it
to Hamas, the de facto administration in
Gaza. World Vision said it had not seen any
substantive evidence to support the charge.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Israeli soldiers, police and Israel Security
Agency (ISA) officers subjected Palestinian
detainees, including children, to torture and
other ill-treatment with impunity, particularly
on arrest and during interrogation. Reported
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
methods included beatings, slapping, painful
shackling, sleep deprivation, use of stress
positions and threats. Although complaints
alleging torture by ISA officers have been
handled by the Ministry of Justice since
2014, and more than 1,000 had been filed
since 2001, no criminal investigations were
opened. Complaints that the Israeli police
used torture or other ill-treatment against
asylum-seekers and members of the
Ethiopian community in Israel were also
common.
The UN Committee against Torture
conducted its fifth periodic review of Israel,
criticizing continued reports of torture and
other ill-treatment, impunity, and the
authorities’ failure to proscribe torture as a
crime under the law. Israeli officials noted
that legislation criminalizing torture was being
drafted by the Ministry of Justice, but it was
not put before the Knesset (parliament).
In September the High Court upheld a
2015 law allowing the authorities to force-
feed hunger-striking detainees; the law was
not used in 2016.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Israeli soldiers, police and security guards
killed at least 98 Palestinians from the OPT in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem;
eight in the Gaza Strip; and three in Israel. In
addition, one Palestinian citizen of Israel,
responsible for killing three Israelis in Tel Aviv
on 1 January, was killed by Israeli police
inside Israel. Most of those killed were shot
while attacking Israelis or suspected of
intending an attack. Some, including
children, were shot when they were posing
no immediate threat to others’ lives and
appeared to be victims of unlawful killings.
Extrajudicial executions
Some of those killed appeared to have been
victims of extrajudicial executions. They
included 16-year-old Mahmoud Shaalan,
shot dead by Israeli soldiers at a Ramallah
checkpoint in February; Mohammed Abu
Khalaf, killed in February by Israeli border
police in East Jerusalem; and Maram Abu
Ismail and her 16-year-old brother Ibrahim,
203who were shot dead at Qalandia checkpoint
in April by private contractors employed by
the Israeli Ministry of Defence.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Israeli forces used excessive, sometimes
lethal, force against Palestinian protesters in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip, killing 22 and
injuring thousands with rubber-coated metal
bullets and live ammunition. Many protesters
threw rocks or other projectiles but were
posing no threat to the lives of well-protected
Israeli soldiers when they were shot.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities used a range of measures to
target human rights defenders, in both Israel
and the OPT, who criticized Israel’s
continuing occupation of the Palestinian
territories.
On 11 July the Knesset passed the so-
called Transparency Law, which imposed new
reporting requirements on organizations that
receive more than 50% of their funding from
foreign governments, almost all of which were
human rights groups or other NGOs critical of
the Israeli government.
Using military orders prohibiting
unauthorized demonstrations in the West
Bank, the authorities suppressed protests by
Palestinians and arrested and prosecuted
protesters and human rights defenders.
Following the annual “Open Shuhada Street”
protest in Hebron on 26 February, the
authorities prosecuted Palestinian human
rights defenders Issa Amro and Farid al-
Atrash on charges that included participating
in a march without a permit and entering a
closed military zone. They were apparently
prosecuted on account of their peaceful
exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly. Issa Amro
also faced charges arising from his peaceful
activism in previous years.
For months after he filmed the extrajudicial
execution of Abed al-Fatah al-Sharif by an
Israeli soldier on 24 March in Hebron,
B’Tselem volunteer Imad Abu Shamsiyeh
received death threats from Israelis in nearby
204
illegal settlements. Police turned him away
and threatened to arrest him when he sought
to lodge a complaint in August.
Palestinians and foreign nationals assisting
human rights NGOs such as Al-Haq with
their work in connection with the ICC
received death threats.
A number of prominent Israeli human
rights organizations and their staff, including
Breaking the Silence, B’Tselem and Amnesty
International Israel, were targeted by a
government campaign to undermine their
work.
In May the authorities charged former
nuclear whistle-blower and prisoner of
conscience Mordechai Vanunu with
breaching the severe and arbitrary
restrictions the authorities have imposed on
his rights to freedom of movement and
expression. The case was still pending at the
end of the year.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTIONS
AND DEMOLITIONS
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
the Israeli authorities demolished 1,089
homes and other structures built without
Israeli permits, an unprecedentedly high
number of demolitions, forcibly evicting more
than 1,593 people. Permits remained
virtually impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
Many of the demolitions were in Bedouin and
herding communities which the Israeli
authorities planned to transfer against the
residents’ wishes. The authorities also
collectively punished the families of
Palestinians who carried out attacks on
Israelis by demolishing or making
uninhabitable 25 family homes, thereby
forcibly evicting their inhabitants.
The authorities also demolished hundreds
of Palestinian homes and other structures
inside Israel that they said were built without
permits, mostly in Bedouin villages in the
Negev/Naqab region. Many of the villages
were officially “unrecognized”.
IMPUNITY
More than two years after the end of the
2014 Gaza-Israel conflict, in which some
Amnesty International Report 2016/171,460 Palestinian civilians were killed, many
in evidently unlawful attacks including war
crimes, the Israeli authorities had indicted
only three soldiers for looting and obstructing
an investigation. In August the Military
Advocate General announced the closure of
investigations into 12 incidents, despite
evidence that some should be investigated as
war crimes. Israel’s military investigations
were not independent or impartial, and failed
to deliver justice.
In a rare move, the Israeli military
investigated, indicted and tried Elor Azaria, a
soldier whose extrajudicial execution by
shooting of a wounded Palestinian in Hebron
was captured on film. The verdict in his case
was expected to be delivered in January
2017. Most members of the Israeli forces
who committed unlawful killings of
Palestinians faced no repercussions. The
Israeli army, Ministry of Justice and police
also did not investigate, failed to investigate
adequately, or closed investigations into
cases of alleged unlawful killings of
Palestinians by Israeli forces in both Israel
and the OPT.
The authorities prosecuted several Jewish
settlers for carrying out lethal attacks on
Palestinians. In January, they charged two
Israelis with committing an arson attack in
July 2015 that killed three members of the
Dawabsheh family, including a child aged 18
months. In May, a Jerusalem court
sentenced Yosef Ben David to life
imprisonment plus 20 years after convicting
him of the abduction and murder of 16-year-
old Palestinian Mohammed Abu Khdeir in
July 2014.
The prosecutor of the ICC continued her
preliminary examination of allegations of
crimes under international law carried out by
Israeli forces and Palestinian armed groups
since 13 June 2014. The Israeli government
allowed an ICC delegation to visit Israel and
the West Bank in October.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
There were new reports of violence against
women, particularly within Palestinian
communities in Israel. Activists reported that
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
at least 21 women were killed by partners or
family members during the year. Some
women were reportedly killed by abusive
partners after police failed to afford them
adequate protection.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The authorities continued to deny asylum-
seekers, more than 90% of whom were from
Eritrea or Sudan, access to a fair and prompt
refugee status determination process. More
than 3,250 asylum-seekers were held at the
Holot detention facility and at Saharonim
Prison in the Negev/Naqab desert at the end
of the year.
According to figures provided by the
Ministry of Interior, there were more than
37,000 Eritrean and Sudanese asylum-
seekers in Israel as of October 2016. More
than 18,900 asylum claims were still pending
as of October 2016.
In February the Knesset passed the fourth
version of an amendment to the Prevention of
Infiltration Law, allowing the authorities to
detain asylum-seekers for up to one year
without charge. Conditions in detention
centres were reported to be severely deficient
due to inadequate food and medical care,
poor sanitation and overcrowding.
In September, a custody appeals tribunal
in Jerusalem declared the government’s
policy of automatically rejecting the asylum
requests of Eritrean army deserters invalid,
although thousands had been rejected on
that basis.
The authorities granted asylum to a
Sudanese national for the first time in June
but continued to press thousands of
Sudanese and Eritrean asylum-seekers,
including those detained at Holot, to leave
Israel “voluntarily”. More than 2,500 were
reported to have agreed to depart
“voluntarily” by the end of the year. The
government refused to disclose details of its
reported agreements with Rwandan and
Ugandan authorities, as to whether they
included guarantees that asylum-seekers
who left Israel voluntarily would not be at real
risk of serious human rights violations, thus
violating the prohibition of refoulement.
205CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
At least five conscientious objectors to
military service were imprisoned. They
included Tair Kaminer, who was held for
almost six months, longer than any woman
conscientious objector previously.
ITALY
Italian Republic
Head of state: Sergio Mattarella
Head of government: Paolo Gentiloni (replaced Matteo
Renzi in December)
Over 4,500 refugees and migrants died or
disappeared in the central Mediterranean
trying to reach Italy, the highest number of
victims on record, while over 181,000
reached Italy. The implementation by Italian
authorities of the EU “hotspot approach” to
identify and separate refugees from alleged
irregular migrants resulted in cases of
excessive use of force, arbitrary detention,
and collective expulsions. Roma continued
to suffer discrimination in access to
housing, with thousands living in
segregated camps and hundreds subjected
to forced evictions. Parliament passed
legislation establishing civil unions for
same-sex couples. Italy continued to fail to
introduce the crime of torture in its criminal
code.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 4,500 people were estimated to have
died in the central Mediterranean while
attempting to reach Italy on overcrowded and
unseaworthy vessels, the worst figure on
record.
Over 181,000 refugees and migrants
reached Italy from North Africa – a slight
increase on previous years. The vast majority
departed from Libya and were rescued at sea
by the Italian Coastguard and Navy, other
countries’ and merchant vessels and, to an
increasing extent, NGOs’ vessels. Of these,
over 25,700 were children travelling alone,
more than twice the number of 2015. The
206
authorities struggled to ensure they were
looked after according to international
standards.
The Italian Navy continued to lead the EU
military operation in the southern Central
Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED Operation
Sophia). In October, the operation started
training the Libyan Coastguard,
notwithstanding reports that it was involved in
shooting incidents against vessels carrying
refugees and migrants, and that people
rescued and returned to Libya were exposed
to arbitrary detention and torture.
The “hotspot approach”, agreed by the EU
in 2015 to achieve the swift identification and
screening of refugees and migrants on the
point of arrival, continued to be implemented
in Italy. Under pressure from the EU to
fingerprint all those arriving by sea, Italian
authorities used arbitrary detention and
excessive force against individuals refusing to
co-operate. Several cases of ill-treatment
were also reported.
Traumatized people, exhausted from their
journey, were hastily interviewed and were
not provided with adequate information on
their rights and the legal consequences of
their statements, by police officials not
trained to assess the status of those in need
of protection. Thousands deemed not to be in
need of protection, and therefore irregularly
present on the territory, were issued with
expulsion orders or deferred rejection orders
requiring them to leave the country
autonomously. Those issued with such
orders, effectively unable to leave Italy for
lack of funds and documents to cross
borders, were left vulnerable to abuse and
exploitation.
Nationals of countries with which Italy
negotiated repatriation agreements continued
to be forcibly returned to their countries of
origin, often within a few days from
disembarkation, raising concern that they
were not given adequate access to an asylum
procedure and that they were expelled
without an assessment of each individual’s
potential risks upon return, in breach of the
prohibition of collective expulsions.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17In August, Italian and Sudanese police
authorities signed a Memorandum of
Understanding to strengthen co-operation in
“migration management”, including through
swift repatriation procedures. While
individuals seeking asylum in Italy cannot be
returned to Sudan on the basis of this
agreement, the identification process
provided is so superficial that it could result
in returning to Sudan people who could face
human rights violations there, in violation of
the principle of non-refoulement.
On 24 August, a group of 40 people
identified on the basis of the agreement as
Sudanese nationals were repatriated from
Italy to Sudan. The group, including people
who had fled violence in Darfur before
reaching Italy, were interrogated upon arrival
by the Sudanese National Intelligence and
Security Service, an agency implicated in
serious human rights violations in Sudan.
The reception system was hosting over
176,500 people by the end of the year,
mostly in emergency centres. The
redistribution of asylum-seekers across the
country continued to encounter opposition
from some local authorities and residents.
Protests took place in several towns, often
organized or endorsed by far-right groups
and the Lega Nord party.
As of mid-December about 120,000
people sought asylum in Italy, up from
83,000 in 2015. Nigerian and Pakistani
nationals were the largest groups.
Throughout the year about 40% of applicants
received some form of protection in the first
instance.
The relocation scheme of asylum-seekers
from Italy and Greece to other EU countries,
adopted by the EU in September 2015, failed
to materialize. Of the 40,000 asylum-seekers
who should have been relocated from Italy,
only 2,654 moved to other countries. No
unaccompanied children were relocated.
Italy also granted humanitarian access to
about 500 people transferred through a
scheme funded by faith-based NGOs S.
Egidio and Federation of Evangelical
Churches in Italy.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
The government failed to adopt the
decrees required to abolish the crime of
“illegal entry and stay”, despite being
instructed to do so by Parliament in April
2014.
In December, in the case of Khlaifia and
others against Italy, the European Court of
Human Rights held that some Tunisian
migrants who had reached Italy in 2011 had
been arbitrarily detained and that they had
been deprived of a remedy to challenge their
detention before being returned to Tunisia.
In November, prosecutors in Perugia,
Umbria, charged seven police officials, a
magistrate and three Kazakhstani diplomats
with offences related to the abduction and
illegal expulsion to Kazakhstan in May 2013
of Alma Shalabayeva and Alua Ablyazova,
wife and six-year-old daughter of Mukhtar
Ablyazov, a Kazakhstani opposition politician.
In July 2013, the Italian government
retroactively rescinded the expulsion order,
acknowledging that their forced return to
Almaty violated Italian law.
DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
Thousands of Roma families continued to live
in segregated camps. Roma-only camps were
frequently located in remote areas, away from
essential services. Living conditions in many
camps remained sub-standard and often
breached national housing regulations as well
as international standards. Hundreds of
Roma families were subjected to forced
evictions in violation of international law.
The government‘s failure to effectively
implement the National Strategy for Roma
Inclusion with respect to housing continued.
Five years after its adoption, there were no
national plans to combat segregation in
camps. Instead, authorities continued to plan
and construct new camps.
In February, in Giugliano, near Naples,
€1.3 million was designated by the municipal
and regional authorities, with the Prefecture
of Naples and the Ministry of Interior, to build
a new segregated camp for the Roma then
living in the Masseria del Pozzo camp. The
Masseria del Pozzo camp was set up near
landfills stocking toxic waste in 2013 to
207house Roma families who had already
suffered forced evictions. In June, following a
court order that the families be removed from
Masseria del Pozzo, local authorities forcibly
evicted the approximately 300 people living
there including dozens of small children. No
alternative was given except the transfer to an
isolated site, in a former fireworks factory with
no working toilets, no electricity and
extremely limited access to water. As of
December the community was still living at
the site in inadequate conditions.
In December, the CERD Committee
expressed concern that Roma continued to
face forced evictions and segregation in
camps and that they were still discriminated
against when trying to access social housing
and other housing benefits.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In May, Parliament passed Law no.76/2016,
establishing civil unions for same-sex couples
and rules governing the cohabiting of
different-sex couples, extending to them most
of the rights of married couples. However,
second-parent adoption was not addressed in
the law.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In March, the national ombudsperson started
his role, with a mandate to monitor conditions
of detention and prevent torture and other ill-
treatment. His remit included monitoring
repatriation flights of irregular migrants.
Parliament’s failure to introduce the crime
of torture into the criminal code, as required
by the UN Convention against Torture, and
overdue since Italy’s ratification in 1989,
continued.
Parliament and government also failed to
agree on measures for the identification of
law enforcement officers, such as tags on
uniforms, which would facilitate
accountability for abuses.
DEATHS IN CUSTODY
In July, five doctors charged with the
manslaughter of Stefano Cucchi, who died a
week after his arrest in the prison wing of a
208
Rome hospital in 2009, were acquitted in a
second appeal trial ordered by the Supreme
Court. A second investigation against the
police officers involved in his arrest was
looking at allegations that he may have died
as a result of beatings while in custody.
JAMAICA
Jamaica
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by
Patrick Linton Allen
Head of government: Andrew Michael Holness
(replaced Portia Simpson Miller in March)
Unlawful killings and extrajudicial
executions continued. Violence against
women and discrimination against lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people persisted. Children
continued to be detained in violation of
international standards.
BACKGROUND
In February, the Jamaica Labour Party won
the general election and Andrew Holness
became Prime Minister.
Despite committing to the establishment of
a national human rights institution, Jamaica
had not established the mechanism by the
end of the year.
Jamaica continued to have one of the
highest homicide rates in the Americas.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
In June, a Commission of Enquiry published
its much-anticipated report into the events
that took place in Western Kingston during
the state of emergency, declared on 23 May
2010, which left at least 69 people dead.
Almost 900 pages long, the report identified a
number of cases of possible extrajudicial
execution and produced a number of
important recommendations for police
reform. 1
In an official response, the Jamaica
Constabulary Force accepted a number of
recommendations, such as committing to
hold administrative reviews into the conduct
Amnesty International Report 2016/17of officers named in the Commissioners’
report. However, the police continued to
refuse to accept any responsibility for human
rights violations or extrajudicial executions
during the state of emergency. By the end of
the year, the government had still not
officially indicated how it would implement
the recommendations of the Commissioners.
While the number of killings by police have
significantly reduced in recent years, 111
people were killed by law enforcement
officials in 2016, compared with 101 in
2015. Women whose relatives were killed by
police, and their families, experienced
pervasive police harassment and
intimidation, and faced multiple barriers to
accessing justice, truth and reparation.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to local NGOs, national legislation
to address violence against women remained
inadequate. For example, the Sexual
Offences Act continued to narrowly define
rape as non-consensual penile penetration of
a woman’s vagina by a man, and to protect
against marital rape in certain circumstances
only. By December, over 470 women and
girls had reported rape during the year,
according to the police.
Criminalization of women engaged in sex
work continued to place them at risk of
discrimination, arbitrary arrest and violence
by the police. 2
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The NGO Jamaicans for Justice reported that
children were still being detained in police
lockups for being “uncontrollable”, often for
illegal periods and in inhumane conditions.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
There remained no legal protection against
discrimination based on real or perceived
sexual orientation or gender identity. Young
LGBTI people continued to face bullying and
harassment in the absence of legal
protection. Consensual sex between men
remained criminalized.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Between January and June, 23 people
reported to the LGBTI rights NGO J-FLAG
that they had been physically assaulted or
attacked because of their real or perceived
sexual orientation or gender identity.
A survey published by J-FLAG found
deeply homophobic attitudes. For example,
only 36% of Jamaicans surveyed said they
would allow their gay child to continue to live
at home. Almost 60% of respondents said
they would harm an LGBTI person who
approached them.
In June, the Attorney General used social
media to criticize the US Embassy for flying a
Pride flag after the killings of LGBTI people in
a nightclub in Orlando, USA.
In August, for the second year in a row, J-
FLAG held activities to celebrate Pride Week.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
Jamaica again failed to ratify the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court,
signed in September 2000, nor had it
adhered to the UN Convention against
Torture or the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance.
1. Jamaica: State of Emergency 2010 – ten things the government must
learn, and ten things it must do (AMR 38/4337/2016)
2. "I feel scared all the time": A Jamaican sex worker tells her story
(News story 27 May 2016)
JAPAN
Japan
Head of government: Shinzo Abe
Progress towards a revision of the
Constitution by the governing Liberal
Democratic Party gained momentum after
the party and its coalition members secured
a two thirds majority in both houses of the
parliament following upper house elections.
There were fears that the revision could
curtail human rights guarantees. Several
municipalities and large corporations took
measures to acknowledge same-sex unions
209in a context of pervasive discrimination
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) people. Executions of
prisoners on death row continued.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
More municipalities adopted written
instruments to recognize same-sex unions. A
growing number of mostly multinational
corporations amended their internal rules to
extend benefits to employees in same-sex
unions. The major political parties pledged to
campaign for LGBTI rights ahead of upper
house elections in July.
Discrimination against LGBTI people
continued, particularly in rural areas. A
transgender woman filed a lawsuit against the
state after she was refused hormone
injections while imprisoned. Parents of a gay
student at Hitotsubashi University in the
capital, Tokyo, filed a lawsuit against the
university and another student for
accountability and compensation; their son
had committed suicide after being “outed”
and bullied.
DISCRIMINATION – ETHNIC MINORITIES
In May the parliament passed the first
national law to condemn the advocacy of
hatred (“hate speech”) towards residents of
overseas origin and their descendants. The
legislation followed an increase in
demonstrations promoting discrimination. Its
effectiveness was questioned by civil society
organizations and lawyers due to its narrow
focus and the fact that it failed to legally ban
“hate speech” or to set penalties. Later that
month in Kanagawa prefecture, a court
issued the first-ever provisional injunction
preventing an anti-Korean activist from
organizing a rally within a radius of 500m of
the premises of an organization supporting
ethnic Koreans.
Also in May, the Supreme Court dismissed
a case brought against the police practice of
blanket surveillance of Japan’s Muslim
community, including people perceived as
Muslim. In 2010, 114 internal Tokyo
Metropolitan Police Department documents
210
had been leaked online which included
personal and financial information about
Muslims labelled as suspected “terrorists” in
Japan. The Court confirmed that there was a
breach of the right to privacy, but left this
type of intelligence gathering unchallenged.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Following the bilateral agreement with the
Republic of Korea (South Korea) in late 2015
on the military sexual slavery system before
and during World War II, in July the South
Korean government launched the Japanese-
government-funded “Reconciliation and
Healing Foundation”. The Japanese
government emphasized that the funds were
not for reparations, in line with its stance that
all such claims were settled during post-war
negotiations. Civil society in South Korea
continued to call for the 2015 agreement to
be revoked, deeming it unconstitutional and
invalid because survivors were not
represented during the negotiations. While
the Imperial Army had forced women from
throughout the Asia-Pacific region into sexual
slavery, by the end of the year Japan had not
started negotiations with any other countries.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Authorities continued to reject a majority of
asylum applications. The government
reported that in 2015, of the 7,586 asylum
applications filed (a 52% increase over the
previous year), only 27 were granted. An
asylum-seeker from Sri Lanka prepared to
sue the state claiming deprivation of his right
to seek asylum because he was deported the
day after his claim was denied by the Ministry
of Justice.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The parliament amended a series of laws
relating to criminal justice. For the first time
the electronic recording of both police and
prosecutor interrogations was required,
although in a limited number of cases. The
existing wiretap law was expanded and a plea
bargaining system was introduced. The
expansion of the use of wiretapping risked
violating the right to freedom of expression.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17In June, the Kumamoto District Court
granted Koki Miyata a retrial due to doubts
concerning the credibility of his
“confessions”. Koki Miyata had served a 13-
year prison term for murder after being
convicted in 1985.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
There were renewed protests in Okinawa
after construction resumed at the US military
base in Takae, marked by scuffles between
riot police and protesters. Some protesters
were injured during the dispersal.
JORDAN
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Head of state: King Abdullah II bin al-Hussein
Head of government: Hani Mulki (replaced Abdullah
Ensour in May)
The authorities continued to restrict the
rights to freedom of expression, association
and assembly, and detained and prosecuted
critics and opponents under criminal
defamation, blasphemy and anti-terrorism
laws. Torture and other ill-treatment
continued in detention centres. Trials before
the State Security Court were unfair.
Women faced discrimination in law and in
practice and were inadequately protected
against sexual and other violence. Migrant
domestic workers were exploited and
abused. Jordan hosted more than 655,000
refugees from Syria but sealed its borders to
new arrivals in June. Courts continued to
pass death sentences; there were no
executions.
BACKGROUND
Jordan remained part of the Saudi Arabia-led
international coalition engaged in armed
conflict in Yemen (see Yemen entry).
In March, the government submitted a
national human rights plan to the King,
intended to phase in human rights
improvements over a 10-year period.
In May, Parliament approved constitutional
amendments empowering the King to directly
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
appoint senior judicial, army, gendarmerie
and General Intelligence Department (GID)
officials. Parliamentary elections held in
September used a proportional
representation system for the first time.
There was continued insecurity along the
border with Syria. In June, a bomb attack
killed several Jordanian soldiers near an
inter-border area in which some 70,000
Syrian refugees remained stranded in
extreme hardship. Following the attack, the
government sealed border crossing points,
denying entry to refugees fleeing the conflict
in Syria. In December, an attack by armed
men near Karak killed 10 people, including
three civilians; the armed group Islamic State
(IS) claimed responsibility.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The government’s 10-year national human
rights plan listed objectives that included
strengthening legal protections against torture
and increasing prosecutions of and
“sanctions” against perpetrators of torture,
but it was not clear that any such reforms
were made in 2016. Cases of police officers
accused of torturing detainees continued to
be handled by special police courts whose
proceedings were neither independent nor
transparent.
DEATHS IN CUSTODY
In January the Adaleh Centre for Human
Rights Studies, an NGO based in the capital,
Amman, reported that at least eight deaths in
detention resulting from torture had occurred
in the previous two months. In April the
government’s human rights co-ordinator said
journalists and human rights activists would
be permitted to attend some police court
trials, including the trial of three officers
accused of beating to death Omar al-Naser
while he was in Criminal Investigation
Department custody in September 2015. The
trial was subject to lengthy adjournments
without explanation and was not resolved by
the end of 2016. Meanwhile, no information
was made public about plans to prosecute
police officers charged in connection with the
211beating to death in police custody of
Abdullah Zu’bi in Irbid in 2015.
UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities continued to prosecute
alleged supporters of IS and other armed
groups, as well as journalists and opposition
political activists, under anti-terrorism and
other laws before the State Security Court
(SSC), a quasi-military court whose
procedures failed to meet international fair
trial standards.
Those tried included Adam al-Natour, a
Polish Jordanian who received a four-year
prison sentence after the SSC convicted him
of “joining an armed group and terrorist
organization” on the basis of a “confession”
that he said he was forced to make under
torture by GID interrogators who beat and
electrocuted him during three weeks of
incommunicado detention. Following this
detention, he was brought before the SSC
Prosecutor and made to sign a statement in
Arabic, a language he could not read or
understand.
ADMINISTRATIVE DETENTION
The authorities held tens of thousands of
individuals under the 1954 Crime Prevention
Law, which allows detentions for up to one
year without charge or trial or any means of
legal remedy.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities restricted freedoms of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly and detained or prosecuted tens of
journalists and critics under criminal
defamation provisions of the Penal Code and
anti-terrorism law provisions that criminalize
criticism of foreign leaders or states. In July,
the official National Centre for Human Rights
reported an increase in arrests and SSC
referrals of peaceful critics and protesters
under these laws.
In May, the authorities released Dr Eyad
Qunaibi, a university professor who had been
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment in
December 2015 after the SSC convicted him
212
of “undermining the political regime... or
inciting opposition to it” for criticizing
Jordan’s relations with Israel in a Facebook
post.
On 25 September, a gunman shot dead
journalist Nahed Hattar outside the court in
Amman where he was being tried for posting
a satirical cartoon on Facebook that the
authorities deemed offensive to Islam. He
had been held for almost a month in pre-trial
detention before a court allowed his release
on bail. Jordan’s official news agency said the
alleged perpetrator was arrested at the scene
of the killing; the case was later referred to
the SSC on charges including murder.
Draft amendments to the Societies Law
proposed in March, if implemented, would
increase government powers to prevent the
legal registration of NGOs or their operations
on national security or public order grounds,
and would deny them access to international
funding without any justification. The
amendments had not been enacted by the
end of the year.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice, and were inadequately
protected against so-called honour crimes
and other forms of gender-based violence.
In April, a parliamentary legal committee
endorsed proposed amendments to Article
308 of the Penal Code that would end the
provision allowing rapists to avoid prosecution
if they marry their victims. However, it would
keep the provision when the victim is aged
between 15 and 18. At the end of the year,
the amendments had still to be enacted.
In July the CEDAW Committee requested
information from the government ahead of its
scheduled 2017 review of Jordan. Among
other things, they requested details of any
government plans to amend the Citizenship
Law to allow Jordanian women married to
foreign spouses to pass their nationality to
their children and husbands on the same
basis as Jordanian men, and to allow their
families increased access to medical care,
education and other services. The Committee
also requested information on government
Amnesty International Report 2016/17plans to amend Article 308 and other Penal
Code provisions that allow rapists to escape
prosecution and mitigate penalties for
perpetrators of so-called honour crimes.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant domestic workers continued to face
exploitation and abuse. In February the
Amman-based NGO Tamkeen reported that
80,000 women migrant domestic workers
were excluded from the protection of labour
laws and exposed to violence and other
abuse by employers. The UN Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons reported
during a visit to Jordan that migrant women
employed as domestic workers who fled
abusive employers were at risk of trafficking
for sexual exploitation. The Special
Rapporteur also reported that refugee women
and girls from Syria were trafficked for sexual
exploitation.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Jordan hosted more than 655,000 refugees
from Syria, including 16,000 Palestinians, as
well as almost 60,000 refugees from other
countries including Iraq, Yemen and Somalia,
and 2.1 million long-term Palestinian
refugees.
By the end of the year, there were 75,000
Syrian refugees stranded in harsh conditions
in the “berm” desert area between the
Rukban and Hadalat border crossings with
Syria. The government denied most of them
entry into Jordan on security grounds but
allowed around 12,000 to enter Jordan in
May, confining them to Village 5, a fenced-off
area of Azraq refugee camp. On 21 June the
authorities sealed Jordan’s border with Syria
after a suicide bomb attack, thereby cutting
off regular humanitarian access to refugees
in the berm. Jordan has tightened border
controls since 2012. The authorities also
deported several refugees on alleged security
grounds.
By July, Jordan had received only 45% of
the funding it required from the international
community, according to the UN, to meet the
needs of refugees from Syria. Around 86% of
Syrians in urban areas of Jordan were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
reported to be living below the poverty line
with limited access to services.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts imposed death sentences; there were
no executions. In February, a government
spokesperson denied media reports that the
authorities planned to execute 13 prisoners.
KAZAKHSTAN
Republic of Kazakhstan
Head of state: Nursultan Nazarbayev
Head of government: Bakytzhan Sagintayev (replaced
Karim Massimov in September)
The rights to freedom of expression, of
peaceful assembly and of association
remained restricted. The authorities used
administrative detention to stop people
from participating in unauthorized protests
and criminal prosecution to target social
media users and independent journalists.
Harsher penalties for NGO leaders – who
were a separate category of offenders in the
Administrative Offences and Criminal Codes
– were used for the first time. New cases of
torture and other ill-treatment against
suspects and prisoners were reported. The
large number of migrant workers in the
country faced exploitation and restricted
access to health care and education. One
person was sentenced to death.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Organizing or participating in a peaceful
public assembly without prior authorization
from the authorities was a violation under
both the Administrative Offences Code and
the Criminal Code, punishable by heavy fines
or up to 75 days’ detention. Providing
“assistance” to “illegal” assemblies, including
by “means of communication”, including
social media, constituted a criminal offence.
In April and May, “unsanctioned”
demonstrations took place across Kazakhstan
as people protested peacefully against
proposed changes to the Land Code to allow
unused agricultural land to be leased to
213foreign citizens for up to 25 years. Authorities
responded by blocking access to main
squares and thoroughfares, and by using
administrative detention to stop would-be
protesters from participating.
Further Land Code protests were planned
for 21 May in the capital Astana, Almaty, the
largest city, and in other towns. Between 17
and 20 May, at least 34 people were arrested
and charged as “organizers” of the protests
after they had announced on social media
their intention to participate or provided
information about the demonstrations. Most
were sentenced to 10-15 days’ detention
under the Administrative Code.
On 21 May, in Almaty, Astana and other
towns, police blocked access to the areas
where the demonstrations were supposed to
take place. Police detained up to 500 people
in Almaty, and smaller numbers elsewhere.
At police stations, the detainees had to sign
statements that they had participated in an
unsanctioned public meeting and give their
fingerprints. They were released after a few
hours. On 21 May, at least 48 journalists
were detained while attempting to cover the
protests, according to freedom of expression
NGO Adil Soz. All were released within a few
hours.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Social media
Prosecutors used the Criminal Code to target
activists for posts on social media.
In January, Yermek Narymbaev and
Serikzhan Mambetalin were sentenced to
prison terms for posting on Facebook extracts
of an unpublished book which was
considered offensive to ethnic Kazakhs. Their
sentences were suspended on appeal. Also
in January, blogger Igor Sychev’s five-year
prison sentence for posting a survey on
another social media site on whether his town
should become part of Russia was upheld on
appeal.
On 28 November, prisoners of conscience
Maks Bokaev and Talgat Ayan were convicted
on criminal charges of “inciting social,
national, clan, racial, class, or religious
discord”, “dissemination of information
214
known to be false” and organizing
unsanctioned meetings and demonstrations.
Maks Bokaev and Talgat Ayan were both
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. Their
posts on Facebook and other social media
platforms in April and May about the
proposed changes to the Land Code and the
ongoing protests formed part of the charges
against them. In July, folk singer Zhanat
Esentaev was convicted under the Criminal
Code for posts on Facebook in relation to the
Land Code protests and sentenced to two
and a half years’ probation.
Criminal prosecution of journalists
In May, Guzyal Baidalinova, journalist and
owner of the Nakanune.kz independent news
portal, was convicted of “dissemination of
information known to be false” and
sentenced to one and a half years’
imprisonment which was converted to a
suspended sentence in July. The outlet had
published articles on the activities of a
leading commercial bank. Nakanune.kz had
been critical of the authorities.
In October, Seitkazy Mataev and his son
Aset Mataev were sentenced to six and five
years’ imprisonment respectively on charges
of embezzlement and tax evasion. Seitkazy
Mataev was the chair of the Union of
Journalists of Kazakhstan and the chair of the
National Press Club; Aset Mataev was the
General Director of KazTAG news agency.
The Union of Journalists had provided
support to independent journalism.
Internet
In January, changes to the Law on
Communications came into force. They
required internet users to download and
install a “national security certificate”. The
certificate allowed authorities to scan
communications sent over the HTTPS
protocol and to block access to individual
webpages with content which the authorities
judged to be illegal.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
NGOs
Leading or participating in an unregistered
organization was an offence under articles in
the Criminal and Administrative Offences
Codes. “Leaders” of associations were
treated as a separate category of offenders,
providing for harsher penalties. The definition
of “leader” was broad, potentially including
any active member of an NGO or other civic
association. These clauses were used for the
first time in 2016, including in the criminal
cases against Maks Bokaev and Talgat Ayan.
Legislative changes introduced at the end
of 2015 mandated the creation of a central
state database of NGOs. Failure to regularly
supply accurate information for the database
could lead to fines or a temporary ban on
activities. In February, the NGO International
Legal Initiative in Almaty challenged the
provision in a civil court, but lost the case.
Soon afterwards, the NGO faced a lengthy tax
inspection. Civil society activists were
concerned that this new law placed overly
broad requirements on NGOs and
constrained their activities.
Religious groups
By law, religious groups were required to
register with the Ministry of Justice.
Membership of an unregistered religious
group was an offence under the
Administrative Offences Code. There were
restrictions on where religious groups could
hold services, with steep fines for meeting or
distributing religious literature in
unsanctioned premises. According to the
NGO Forum 18, which promotes religious
freedom, groups were fined for meeting to
worship in each other’s homes. Seven
Baptists in East Kazakhstan Region were
fined in August.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The practice of torture and other ill-treatment
continued. The Coalition of NGOs of
Kazakhstan against Torture registered 163
new cases of torture and other ill-treatment
between January and November 2016.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Article 419 of the Criminal Code (“false
reporting of a crime”) was invoked by
prosecutors against those whose allegations
of torture or other ill-treatment were
investigated and deemed to be unfounded.
In September, a former prison officer was
convicted of the rape and torture of a woman
prisoner in Almaty Region and sentenced to
nine years’ imprisonment. The woman had
reported being gang-raped and beaten by
four prison officers; she gave birth as a result
of the rape. The prosecution of the other
three prison officers was dropped due to lack
of evidence. The one conviction secured was
based on a paternity test that showed that the
former prison officer had fathered the child.
The case drew attention to the wider issue of
sexual violence against women prisoners in
places of detention.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Labour migration to Kazakhstan, mainly from
neighbouring Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, was predominantly irregular.
Officials estimated that there were between
300,000 and 1.5 million migrant workers in
the country, and that the number of people
arriving for work in 2016 was much higher
than in 2015. Most migrant workers worked
without written contracts and were vulnerable
to exploitation, including having to work long
hours with little or no rest time, low and
irregularly paid wages, and dangerous
working conditions, particularly in the
agriculture and construction sectors. Many
depended on their employers for housing,
which was often overcrowded and of poor
quality. Some employers also confiscated
migrant workers’ passports, leaving them in
circumstances that amounted to forced
labour. Migrant workers without permanent
residency were unable to access free health
care and faced problems enrolling their
children in schools.
Kazakhstan had not ratified the
International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families.
215DEATH PENALTY
Kazakhstan was abolitionist for ordinary
crimes, but retained the death penalty for 17
crimes that constituted terrorism-related
offences or war crimes. In November, Ruslan
Kulekbaev was convicted on terrorism-related
charges of killing 10 people in Almaty in July
and sentenced to death. He was the sixth
person to be sentenced to death since
President Nazarbayev signed a moratorium
on executions in 2003. Since then all death
sentences have been commuted to life
imprisonment.
KENYA
Republic of Kenya
Head of state and government: Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta
Security forces carried out enforced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions
and torture with impunity, killing at least
122 people by October. Some abuses were
committed by security agencies in the
context of counter-terror operations, others
by unaccountable police officers and other
security agencies. Police used excessive
and lethal force to disperse demonstrators
calling for fair election practices. Political
opposition, anti-corruption groups and other
civil society activists, as well as journalists
and bloggers, were harassed. Families in
informal settlements and marginalized
communities were forcibly evicted from
their homes.
Local governments were also accused of
corruption, largely by inflating costs in
procurement processes. The Ministries of
Health and of Devolution and Planning were
under investigation for alleged
misappropriation of funds, among other
things.
In May, civil society organizations
launched Kura Yangu, Sauti Yangu, a
movement to ensure legitimate, fair and well-
organized elections due in August 2017.
Soon after, the opposition Coalition for
Reform and Democracy (CORD) organized
weekly demonstrations over what it
considered the bias of the Independent
Electoral and Boundaries Commission
(IEBC). On 3 August, IEBC commissioners
resigned, ending months of protests over the
election process. On 14 September, the
Election Laws (Amendment) Bill came into
force, inaugurating the process of recruiting
new IEBC commissioners. However, the
recruitment of new commissioners was
delayed after the recruiting panel postponed
indefinitely the recruitment of the
Chairperson after five interviewed candidates
failed to meet the requirements. The delay
will negatively impact the electoral
preparations timeline.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Al-Shabaab, the Somali-based armed group,
continued to carry out attacks in Kenya.
On 25 October, for example, in the
northeastern town of Mandera, at least 12
people were killed in an attack by al-Shabaab
on a guesthouse hosting members of a
theatre group.
BACKGROUND COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Corruption remained rife. President Kenyatta
asked almost a quarter of his cabinet
secretaries to resign after the state’s Ethics
and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC)
accused them of corruption. Some faced trial
for corruption, others appeared before
oversight institutions to answer allegations of
corruption. According to the EACC, at least
30% of GDP – equivalent to about US$6
billion – is being lost annually to corruption. In the context of counter-terrorism operations
targeting al-Shabaab, security agencies were
implicated in human rights violations,
including extrajudicial executions, enforced
disappearances and torture. Despite an
increase in reported cases of these violations,
meaningful investigations were not carried
out with a view to ensuring accountability.
216
Amnesty International Report 2016/17EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Police and other security agencies carried out
extrajudicial executions as well as enforced
disappearances, and torture. 1
Willie Kimani, a lawyer with a legal aid
charity, his client Josphat Mwendwa and their
taxi driver Joseph Muiruri, were abducted on
23 June at an unknown location. On 1 July,
their bodies were found dumped in a river in
Machakos County, eastern Kenya; post
mortems showed they had been tortured.
Josphat Mwendwa, a motorcycle taxi driver,
had accused a member of the Administration
Police (AP) of attempted murder after the
officer shot him in the arm during a routine
traffic check. The officer then charged him
with a traffic offence to intimidate him into
dropping the complaint. The abduction
happened after Willie Kimani and Josphat
Mwendwa left Mavoko law courts in
Machakos County after attending a hearing in
the traffic offence case. On 21 September,
four AP officers – Fredrick ole Leliman,
Stephen Cheburet Morogo, Sylvia Wanjiku
Wanjohi and Leonard Maina Mwangi – were
found guilty of murdering the three men. The
officers were remanded in custody awaiting
sentencing at the end of the year.
The killings of the three men triggered
protests and mobilized human rights
organizations, the media and legal and other
professional organizations across the country
to demand action against enforced
disappearance and extrajudicial executions.
Job Omariba, a nurse in the eastern town
of Meru was reported to have gone missing in
Nairobi on 21 August. His body was
discovered at Machakos mortuary on 30
August. Later that day, the Special Crime
Prevention Unit arrested three police officers
on suspicion of his abduction and murder.
On 29 August, two policemen walked into
Mwingi Level 4 Hospital and shot dead
Ngandi Malia Musyemi, a hawker, after he
reported to police that he had been
carjacked. His sister witnessed the killing.
Officers from Nairobi, Machakos and Embu
were assigned to investigate the killing.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Kenya does not have an official database
of police killings or enforced disappearances.
According to Haki Africa, a human rights
group, there were 78 extrajudicial executions
and enforced disappearances in Mombasa
County in the first eight months of 2016. The
Daily Nation newspaper documented 21
cases of police killings during the same
period.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The police used excessive and lethal force to
disperse protesters in Nairobi and other
towns during demonstrations against the
IEBC.
On 16 May, a male protester in Nairobi
was shot and injured in a confrontation with
police as residents from the informal
settlement of Kibera tried to march to the
electoral commission’s offices.
On 23 May, police used batons, tear gas,
water cannons and, in some cases, live
ammunition to disperse protesters marching
towards the electoral commission’s office. A
video showed three policemen kicking and
beating a protester after he fell down. 2 The
same day, at least two people were killed and
53 injured during a demonstration in the
western city of Kisumu.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to curtail freedom
of expression by intimidating and harassing
journalists, bloggers and other members of
civil society, particularly by using the
ambiguity of the Kenya Information and
Communication Act. At least 13 people were
prosecuted under Section 29 of the law,
which includes vague terms such as “grossly
offensive” and “indecent”. On 19 April, the
High Court found that Section 29 was in
breach of the Constitution’s provisions on the
right to freedom of expression.
Mbuvi Kasina, a journalist, continued to
face six counts of misuse of a licensed
telecommunication system for questioning
the expenditure of Kitui South Constituency
Development Funds.
On 27 September, police harassed,
attacked and destroyed the camera of
217Duncan Wanga, a K24 TV journalist and
cameraman, while he was covering a
demonstration in the western city of Eldoret.
On 1 October, the Deputy President
threatened to sue activist Boniface Mwangi
after he posted a tweet linking the Deputy
President to the murder in May of
businessman Jacob Juma. The Deputy
President’s lawyers demanded that the
activist offer an apology, retraction and
clarification within seven days. Boniface
Mwangi’s lawyers welcomed the suit, citing
ICC cases and allegations made by a
Member of Parliament about Jacob Juma’s
killing to show that the Deputy President’s
reputation had not been injured by the tweet.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In May, shortly after it revoked the assumed
refugee status of Somalis who had fled to
Kenya, the government announced it would
close Dadaab refugee camp on 30
November. To justify the move, it cited
national security concerns and the need for
the international community to share the
responsibility of hosting the refugees. Dadaab
is home to over 280,000 refugees, of whom
260,000 are from Somalia. The short
timeframe, government statements about the
repatriation process and the lack of security
in Somalia raised concerns that the
repatriation of Somalis would be forced, in
violation of international law, and put at risk
the lives of tens of thousands of people. 3
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, by mid-October, 27,000 Somali
refugees had returned to Somalia from
Dadaab in 2016, nominally voluntarily. On 16
November, the authorities stated they would
extend the deadline for the closure of Dadaab
by six months.
In May, the government disbanded the
Department of Refugee Affairs (DPA), created
in accordance with the 2006 Refugee Act,
and established instead the Refugee Affairs
Secretariat. The Secretariat is not established
by law and functions at the behest of the
Ministry of Interior and National Government
Co-ordination.
218
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
On 16 June, the High Court in Mombasa
upheld the legality of anal examinations of
men suspected of engaging in same-sex
sexual activity. Two men had petitioned the
Court to declare unconstitutional anal
examinations as well as HIV and Hepatitis B
tests they had been forced to undergo in
February 2015. The Court ruled that there
had been no violation of rights or breach of
the law. Forced anal examinations and forced
HIV testing violate the right to privacy and the
prohibition of torture and other ill-treatment
under international law. The High Court’s
ruling breached several human rights treaties
ratified by Kenya.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTIONS
Families living in informal settlements and
marginalized communities continued to be
forcibly evicted in the context of large
infrastructure development projects.
In Deep Sea informal settlement in
Nairobi, 349 families were forcibly evicted on
8 July to allow construction of the road
linking Thika Super Highway to Westlands
Ring Road. The eviction took place without
notice and while consultation was taking
place between the community and the Kenya
Urban Roads Authority (KURA). Residents
were attacked during the evictions by armed
youth ferried in by government construction
and private vehicles. Armed police officers
were present and threatened to shoot
residents if they resisted eviction. KURA and
the EU, which is funding the road, had
assured Deep Sea residents they would not
be forcibly evicted.
KURA took responsibility for the violations
of the rights of residents during a meeting
with Deep Sea community leaders. In a letter
to the community, it agreed to urgently put in
place corrective measures, including to
restore the sanitation facilities, facilitate
reconstruction of people’s houses, and
provide humanitarian assistance such as
cooking facilities and blankets for those who
had lost everything. KURA and Deep Sea
Amnesty International Report 2016/17residents agreed that permanent residents
would each receive 20,000 Kenya shillings
(around US$200) and that this would not be
recognized as covering losses incurred in the
forced eviction.
Representatives of the Sengwer
Indigenous People reported that Kenya
Forest Service repeatedly burned houses in
Embobut forest. Local courts heard cases
concerning Sengwer people who had been
arrested for being in the forest, despite a
pending court case brought by Sengwer to
challenge their eviction and a 2013
injunction issued by the High Court of Eldoret
to stop arrests and evictions while the legal
challenge was being considered.
1. Kenya: Set up judicial inquiry into hundreds of enforced
disappearances and killings (News story, 30 August)
2. Kenya: Investigate police crackdown against protesters (News story,
17 May)
3. Kenya: Government officials coercing refugees back to war-torn
Somalia (News story, 15 November)
KOREA
(DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE’S
REPUBLIC OF)
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Head of state: Kim Jong-un
Head of government: Pak Pong-ju
Citizens of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (North Korea) continued
to suffer violations of most aspects of their
human rights. North Koreans and foreign
nationals were arbitrarily detained and
sentenced after unfair trials for criminal
“offences” that were not internationally
recognized. Severe restrictions on the right
to freedom of expression continued.
Thousands of North Koreans were sent by
the authorities to work abroad, often under
harsh conditions. The number of North
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Koreans fleeing their country and arriving in
the Republic of Korea (South Korea)
increased.
BACKGROUND
The government tested nuclear weapons
twice, once in January and again in
September, increasing tension between North
Korea and the international community. The
UN increased its economic sanctions on
North Korea as a result, leading to fears from
inside the country and from foreign experts of
heightened food shortages and a further
deterioration in living standards. Experts
considered the possible economic impact to
be a motivation for more people leaving the
country, but the risk of political purges in the
form of imprisonment and reported
executions among the ruling elite was seen
as a key contributing factor.
The Korean Workers’ Party held its
congress in May for the first time in 36 years.
Journalists from international media were
invited to the country for the occasion, but
operated under strict restrictions and were
not allowed to cover congress meetings.
Severe floods in August killed at least 138
people and displaced 69,000 others,
according to the World Food Programme.
The government asked for humanitarian
assistance including food, shelter, water and
sanitation but international response was
minimal due to concerns expressed by
potential donors about the country’s nuclear
programme.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
A total of 1,414 people left North Korea and
arrived in South Korea. The figure increased
by 11% from 2015, and rose for the first time
since 2011 when Kim Jong-un came to
power.
Along with reports of ordinary North
Koreans leaving, media in South Korea and
Japan reported several high profile
government officials deserting their posts and
seeking asylum. The South Korean
government confirmed in August the arrival
of Thae Young-ho, North Korea’s deputy
ambassador to the UK and his family.
219Thirteen restaurant workers, sent by the
government to work in Ningbo, China, flew
directly from China to South Korea in April
(see Korea (Republic of) entry). On their
arrival in South Korea, the North Korean
authorities claimed that the 12 women in the
group were abducted from China and taken
to South Korea. According to a media
interview with their former colleagues
arranged in Pyongyang by the North Korean
government, the workers had their passports
taken away from them while in China, which
would have restricted their ability to travel
freely. 1
Interviews with North Koreans who left the
country as well as media reports said that the
government had increased its surveillance
efforts to prevent people from leaving via the
Chinese-Korean border. Those who
successfully left continued to be at risk of
detention, imprisonment, forced labour, and
torture and other ill-treatment if arrested and
returned from China.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The government continued to dispatch
through state-owned enterprises at least
50,000 people to work in some 40 countries
including Angola, China, Kuwait, Qatar and
Russia in various sectors including medicine,
construction, forestry and catering. Workers
did not receive wages directly from
employers, but through the North Korean
government after significant deductions. Most
workers were deprived of information about
international or domestic labour laws, and
often lacked access in the host countries to
any government agencies and other
organizations monitoring compliance with or
offering assistance in claiming labour rights.
These workers were frequently subjected
to excessive working hours and were
vulnerable to occupational accidents and
diseases. Poland announced in June that it
was no longer allowing workers from North
Korea to enter the country following media
reports of a fatal shipyard accident involving
a North Korean worker in 2014. Malta made
a similar announcement in July, and denied
220
visa extensions to existing North Korean
workers.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities sentenced people, including
foreign nationals, to long prison terms after
unfair trials. Frederick Otto Warmbier, a US
student, was convicted of “subversion”; he
only admitted stealing a propaganda banner.
He was sentenced to 15 years’ hard labour in
March; he was not given consular access for
at least six months. Kim Dong-chul, a 62-
year-old US citizen born in South Korea, was
sentenced to 10 years’ hard labour in April
for “spying”; the authorities failed to provide
details about the alleged spying activities.
The sentences were imposed as new UN
sanctions on North Korea were authorized
earlier in the year, and before the Korean
Workers’ Party Congress in May when there
was increased international attention on
North Korea. 2 Up to 120,000 people
remained in detention in the four known
political prison camps, where they were
subjected to systematic, widespread and
gross human rights violations such as forced
labour, and torture and other ill-treatment −
some amounting to crimes against humanity.
Many of those held in these camps had not
been convicted of any internationally
recognized criminal offence but were
detained for “guilt-by-association”, simply for
being related to individuals deemed
threatening to the state.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to impose severe
restrictions on the right to freedom of
expression, including the right to seek,
receive and impart information regardless of
national borders. The government persisted
in restricting access to outside sources of
information; there were no national
independent newspapers, media or civil
society organizations.
The professional activities of the very few
international journalists allowed into the
country remained severely restricted. BBC
journalists visiting North Korea ahead of the
Korean Workers' Party Congress in May were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17briefly detained incommunicado, interrogated
and expelled from the country because the
government found the stories they produced
highlighting aspects of everyday life in
Pyongyang to be ‘disrespectful’. Agence
France-Presse became one of the very few
foreign media companies to operate in North
Korea when it opened a Pyongyang office in
September.
Almost everyone was denied internet and
international mobile phone services. North
Koreans who lived close to the Chinese
border took significant risks in using
smuggled mobile phones connected to
Chinese networks in order to make contact
with individuals abroad. People who did not
own such phones had to pay exorbitant fees
to brokers in order to make international
calls. The use of smuggled mobile phones to
connect to Chinese mobile networks exposed
everyone involved to increased surveillance,
as well as the risk of arrest and detention on
various charges, including espionage. 3
The existing computer network remained
available to a very limited number of people,
providing access to domestic websites and
email services only. In September, the
misconfiguration of a server in North Korea
revealed to the world that the network
contained only 28 websites, all controlled by
official bodies or state-owned enterprises.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In February, the authorities stopped all
investigations into abductions of Japanese
citizens, reversing the 2014 bilateral
agreement to investigate cases. Media
reports said that the decision followed
Japan’s reinstating previously eased
sanctions after North Korea’s nuclear
weapons tests in January. North Korea had
previously admitted that its security agents
abducted 12 Japanese nationals during the
1970s and 1980s.
1. South Korea: End secrecy surrounding North Korean restaurant
workers (ASA 25/4413/2016)
2. North Korea: U.S. citizen hard labour sentence shrouded in secrecy
(News story, 29 April)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
3. Connection denied: Restrictions on mobile phones and outside
information in North Korea (ASA 24/3373/2016)
KOREA (REPUBLIC
OF)
Republic of Korea
Head of state and government: Park Geun-hye
Restrictions on the rights to freedom of
peaceful assembly and expression
persisted. Asylum-seekers were detained
and conscientious objectors were
imprisoned for exercising their human
rights. The detention in a state facility of
13 restaurant workers originally from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(North Korea) called into question the
legality of the existing settlement support
process for North Koreans arriving in the
country.
The government failed to prevent private
companies from hindering lawful trade
union activity, and only belatedly followed
up on deaths and adverse health effects
resulting from the use of harmful products.
The decision of the government to proceed
with the deployment of the US-built
Terminal High Altitude Area Defence
(THAAD) anti-missile system triggered
strong opposition from domestic groups, as
well as condemnation from China and North
Korea.
Lawmakers voted to impeach President Park
Geun-hye on 9 December, which must be
confirmed through a decision by the
Constitutional Court.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to restrict people from
exercising their right to freedom of peaceful
assembly, often under the pretext of
protecting public order. By the end of the
year, the authorities had not completed an
investigation into the excessive use of force
by police against largely peaceful protesters
during the anti-government “People’s Rally”
in November 2015, nor held accountable any
221officers or commanding authorities
responsible. On 25 September, Baek Nam-gi,
a veteran rural activist critically injured after
he was hit by a water cannon during the
demonstrations, died after spending 10
months in a coma. 1
The delay in investigating Baek Nam-gi’s
injuries was in sharp contrast to the
conviction of Han Sang-gyun, president of
the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions,
and co-organizer of several demonstrations,
including union participation in the People’s
Rally. Han Sang-gyun was sentenced to five
years in prison on 4 July on charges
including inciting illegal acts among a small
number of protesters during the largely
peaceful demonstrations. The sentence was
reduced to three years on 13 December on
appeal. 2
In another instance of what critics of the
government saw as an attempt to limit
freedom of assembly, the Korean Navy filed a
civil lawsuit against 116 individuals and five
groups protesting against the construction of
a naval base on Jeju island. In March, the
Navy sought 3.4 billion KRW (US$2.9 million)
as compensation for losses incurred from
construction delays allegedly caused by
protests that had been ongoing for eight
years.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The National Assembly passed an anti-
terrorism law in March after the opposition
staged a nine-day filibuster due to concerns
over what they saw as its potential for abuse.
The law greatly expanded the power of the
state to conduct surveillance of
communications and to collect personal
information on people suspected of links with
terrorism.
The authorities undercut press freedom
through increasingly heavy interference with
news reporting, especially by television
broadcasters. In July, the National Union of
Media Workers denounced an array of tactics
used by the government to influence news
coverage, including nominating individuals
close to the government to the boards of
influential, publicly owned media
222
corporations and launching disciplinary
actions against individual journalists as a
warning to others. These tactics were evident
during the reporting of the Sewol Ferry
disaster in 2014 and the discussions on the
THAAD system.
The authorities continued to use the
vaguely worded National Security Law to
intimidate and imprison people exercising
their right to freedom of expression.
Individuals arrested for alleged violations of
the law included members of the Corean
Alliance for an Independent Reunification
and Democracy (CAIRD), which was forced
to disband as a direct result of repeated
repressions. Kim Hye-young, a CAIRD activist
suffering from thyroid cancer, was sentenced
to two years’ imprisonment in January after
being arrested in July 2015 during a peaceful
protest. 3 Yang Ko-eun, another CAIRD
representative, was prohibited from travelling
overseas in June to speak about the
conditions of her fellow members, and was
arrested in September.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In May, the UK company Reckitt Benckiser
accepted full responsibility for the deaths of
at least 95 people, as well as for adverse
health effects suffered by hundreds and
potentially thousands more. These were
linked to a humidifier sterilizer product sold
by its Korean subsidiary over a period of
many years. Following a country visit the
previous year, the UN Special Rapporteur on
human rights and hazardous substances
concluded in an August report that this and
other companies had failed to conduct a
reasonable degree of human rights due
diligence with respect to the safety of the
chemicals they sold to consumers. He
recommended that Reckitt Benckiser ensure
that all victims be identified and receive
compensation.
WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Businesses, particularly those in the
construction sector, continued to hinder
union activities among employees and
workers employed by subcontractors without
Amnesty International Report 2016/17being sanctioned by the government.
According to a June report by the UN
Working Group on the issue of human rights
and transnational corporations and other
business enterprises, some companies had
set up so-called “yellow unions” that were not
independent and did not meet standards for
collective bargaining. Other companies hired
legal consultants to design “union-busting”
measures, or private security firms to harass
union members.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The National Immigration Service detained
more than 100 asylum-seekers for months at
Incheon International Airport, including 28
men from Syria whom the Incheon District
Court ruled in June should be released and
allowed to apply for asylum. Dozens of
asylum-seekers from other countries such as
Egypt remained detained at the airport under
inhumane conditions and without basic
necessities and services, including beds,
adequate showers and sanitation facilities,
food acceptable for religious beliefs, or the
opportunity to exercise outdoors.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Thirteen North Korean restaurant workers
who had been working in Ningbo, China,
were detained for four months in a facility run
by the National Intelligence Service after their
arrival from China in April (see Korea
(Democratic People’s Republic of) entry).
Relatives said in media interviews facilitated
by the North Korean government that the
workers had been involuntarily taken to South
Korea. The individuals were not allowed to
contact their families or lawyers of their
choosing, nor to talk to anybody outside the
facility about their reasons for travelling to
South Korea. This undermined a review of
the lawfulness of their detention by an
independent and impartial judicial power and
raised questions about the government’s
enforced settlement support process for
arrivals from North Korea. 4
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
Approximately 400 conscientious objectors to
military service remained in prison solely for
exercising their right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion, which also
constituted a case of arbitrary detention
under international law. Those who had
completed their jail terms for refusing to
perform military service in the absence of any
alternatives continued to face economic and
social disadvantages due to these criminal
records. Following legal amendments which
came into force in 2015, on 20 December
the government published the names and
personal information of 237 conscientious
objectors on the website of the Military
Manpower Administration.
The Constitutional Court was still
examining the legality of conscientious
objections in cases brought between 2012
and 2015. District courts ruled in favour of
four men refusing military duty, adding to the
six men receiving acquittals in 2015. Appeals
by the prosecution, however, resulted in the
overturning of two of the acquittals. In
October, an appeals court acquitted two other
men who had appealed against the guilty
verdicts handed down by the court of first
instance.
1. Urgent action: Protester seriously injured by water cannon (ASA
25/4503/2016)
2. South Korea: Five year sentence against union leader a chilling blow
to peaceful protest (News story, 4 July)
3. South Korea: Woman denied medical help on hunger strike (ASA
25/4150/2016)
4. South Korea: End secrecy surrounding North Korean restaurant
workers (ASA 25/4413/2016)
KUWAIT
State of Kuwait
Head of state: Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-
Sabah
Head of government: Sheikh Jaber al-Mubarak al-
Hamad al-Sabah
223The authorities further curtailed freedom of
expression and prosecuted and imprisoned
government critics under criminal
defamation laws; some were prisoners of
conscience. Members of the Bidun minority
continued to face discrimination and were
denied citizenship rights. Migrant workers
remained inadequately protected against
exploitation and abuse. Courts handed
down new death sentences; no executions
were reported.
BACKGROUND
Parliament approved a new law lowering the
age of minors from 18 to 16 years on 31
December 2015. When enacted in January
2017, anyone arrested at the age of 16 or 17
would be tried as an adult, and in some
cases could face the death penalty.
The UN Committee against Torture
considered Kuwait’s third periodic report in
July. 1 The Committee subsequently
expressed concern about proposed
amendments to the Code of Criminal
Procedures that would double to four days
the period for which police can hold detained
suspects without bringing them before a
judge and increase pre-trial detention on
remand from 10 days to a maximum of
21 days.
In July, after reviewing Kuwait’s third report
on its application of the ICCPR, the UN
Human Rights Committee presented
recommendations to the government,
including on reform of criminal blasphemy
and insult laws; criminalization of domestic
violence, including marital rape; and action to
address Bidun statelessness. 2
Kuwait remained part of the Saudi Arabia-
led international coalition engaged in armed
conflict in Yemen (see Yemen entry).
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities tightened restrictions on
freedom of expression. A new cybercrime law
that took effect in January further restricted
online expression, penalizing peaceful
criticism of the government, the judiciary and
others with up to 10 years’ imprisonment.
224
Also in January, Parliament approved an
electronic media law regulating all online
publications, including electronic news
services, online newspapers, television, social
media and blogs, placing them under a legal
obligation to obtain a government licence to
operate. The authorities began implementing
the new law in July. In February, the Law on
Print and Publications was amended to cover
online publications. In June, a new law came
into force prohibiting anyone with a
confirmed conviction on charges of insulting
God, the prophets or the Emir, from running
for Parliament, in effect barring some
government critics from being elected.
Abdulhamid Dashti, a Shi’a opposition MP,
was stripped of his parliamentary immunity in
March. He then went abroad but faced
prosecution and separate trials on an array of
charges – including some arising from his
peaceful criticism of the governments of
Bahrain and Saudi Arabia in social and other
media – and possible prison sentences
totalling over 40 years. In December, an
appeal court overturned his acquittal in one
case and imposed a 10-year sentence. He
was unable to lodge an appeal while he
remains outside Kuwait.
Musallam al-Barrak, a former MP and
leading government critic, continued to serve
a two-year prison term for criticizing the
government in a speech and faced separate
trials on other charges. In November the
Appeal Court upheld the suspended prison
sentences of 13 people for publicizing or
reciting extracts from Musallam al-Barrak’s
speech.
In February, the Appeal Court confirmed
the one-year prison sentence followed by
expulsion from Kuwait imposed on Bidun
rights activist Abdulhakim al-Fadhli in 2015
for participating in a peaceful “illegal
gathering”. He was arrested in April to serve
his sentence, which was confirmed in May by
the Cassation Court. In June, on appeal, the
Misdemeanours Cassation Court ordered his
release pending review, and in September it
upheld the initial verdict. The authorities
released Abdulhakim al-Fadhli in August
after he completed a three-month prison
Amnesty International Report 2016/17term in a separate case but he handed
himself to the authorities in September
following the Misdemeanours Cassation
Court’s verdict. Kuwaiti nationality was outside its jurisdiction.
In December the Cassation Court rejected his
appeal.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY The authorities continued to withhold
citizenship from more than 100,000 Bidun
residents of Kuwait, who remained stateless.
In May, Parliament approved a draft law that
would grant Kuwaiti citizenship to up to
4,000 Bidun and referred it to the
government; it had not been enacted by the
end of 2016. The government of the island
state of Comoros said in May that it would
consider granting “economic citizenship” to
Bidun if it received an official request from
the Kuwaiti authorities.
The number of terrorism-related arrests and
trials increased. Courts sentenced at least
two defendants to death and others to prison
terms. A 2015 law requiring all citizens and
residents of Kuwait to provide the authorities
with samples of their DNA came into force in
July, despite local and international calls for
its amendment due to it being
disproportionate and a violation of the right to
privacy. Under the law, anyone who does not
comply or has no valid excuse for failing to
provide a sample faces up to one year in
prison and/or a fine of up to 10,000 Kuwaiti
dinars (US$33,150).
In May, the Court of Cassation confirmed
the death sentence of one man convicted of
perpetrating the July 2015 bombing of the
Imam Sadiq Mosque in Kuwait City, but
reduced the sentence of his co-accused to
15 years’ imprisonment. The Court failed to
exclude statements that were alleged to have
been extracted under torture and other ill-
treatment as evidence in the proceedings.
In January, the Criminal Court sentenced
two men to death and 20 others to prison
terms ranging from five years to life on
charges that included “spying for Iran and
Hizbullah”. Some of the 26 defendants in the
case alleged that security officials tortured
them in pre-trial detention to coerce
“confessions”. The Court failed to investigate
their allegations of torture. In July, an appeal
court confirmed one death sentence in the
case, while reducing other sentences and
acquitting nine defendants. The authorities
then referred 17 of the defendants for trial on
new terrorism-related charges.
DEPRIVATION OF NATIONALITY
In April, the Administrative Cassation Court
rejected a ruling of the Administrative Appeal
Court that a case brought by former MP
Abdullah Hashr al-Barghash against a
government decision to strip him of his
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
DISCRIMINATION – BIDUN
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and in practice. In May, the Committee
for Legislative and Legal Affairs approved a
proposed amendment to the citizenship law
that would allow Kuwaiti women to pass their
nationality on to their children, regardless of
the father’s nationality. The amendment had
not been enacted by the end of the year.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers, including those in the
domestic, construction and other sectors,
continued to face exploitation and abuse
under the official kafala sponsorship system,
which ties workers to their employers and
prevents them from changing jobs or leaving
the country without the employer’s
permission. In July, the authorities issued a
decree setting minimum wages for domestic
workers, most of whom are women.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts handed down death sentences for
offences including murder and drug-related
charges. No executions were reported.
1. Kuwait: Amnesty International submission to the UN Committee
against Torture (MDE 17/4395/2016)
2. Kuwait: Amnesty International submission to the UN Human Rights
Committee (MDE 17/4145/2016)
225KYRGYZSTAN
Kyrgyz Republic
Head of state: Almazbek Atambaev
Head of government: Sooronbai Jeenbekov (replaced
Temir Sariev in April)
Prisoner of conscience Azimjan Askarov
remained in prison, despite a
recommendation by the UN Human Rights
Committee that he be immediately
released. A “foreign agents” law that would
have negatively affected NGOs was
rejected, but a draft law on propaganda of
“non-traditional sexual relations” remained
under discussion. Constitutional
amendments threatened human rights
protection. Perpetrators of torture and of
violence against women enjoyed impunity,
and police carried out discriminatory raids
against sex workers. The authorities
continued to make no genuine effort to
effectively investigate the June 2010
violence in Osh and Jalal-Abad.
PRISONER OF CONSCIENCE
On 31 March, the UN Human Rights
Committee urged Kyrgyzstan to immediately
release prisoner of conscience Azimjan
Askarov, an ethnic Uzbek human rights
defender, who was sentenced in 2010 to life
in prison for purportedly participating in the
2010 ethnic violence and the murder of a
police officer. The Committee considered that
he had been arbitrarily detained, tortured and
denied his right to a fair trial. In response, the
Supreme Court reviewed the case on 11 and
12 July, but did not follow the Committee’s
conclusions that Azimjan Askarov should be
released, and ordered a retrial which opened
at Chui Regional Court on 4 October. It
continued through to 20 December with a
verdict expected in January 2017. Azimjan
Askarov participated in all 10 hearings,
seated in a metal cage.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The Parliament rejected the proposed
“foreign agents” law, originally proposed in
226
2014, on its third reading in May. It would
have forced NGOs receiving foreign aid and
engaging in any form of vaguely defined
“political activities” to adopt and publicly use
the stigmatizing label of “foreign agent”.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In May, the Parliamentary Committee on Law,
Order and Fighting Crime withdrew draft
legislation to criminalize “fostering a positive
attitude” towards “non-traditional sexual
relations” for further review before the final
parliamentary vote. LGBTI rights activists said
that even though the law had not yet been
passed, it was already “hanging over them”
and limiting their activities.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In a referendum held on 11 December,
voters accepted constitutional amendments
that undermine human rights protection.
These amendments introduce clauses on
“supreme state values” and weaken the
supremacy of international law over domestic
law stipulated in the current Constitution. An
amendment to the article on marriage and
the family states that the family is formed on
the basis of a union between a woman and a
man; the current Constitution does not
include this wording.
DISCRIMINATION – SEX WORKERS
In June and July, police in the capital,
Bishkek, the surrounding Chui region, and in
the southern city of Osh carried out co-
ordinated and targeted operations in areas
where sex workers were known to
congregate, and detained and penalized
women they found there. Sex work is not
criminalized in Kyrgyzstan, but some of the
women received administrative fines for
“petty hooliganism” or for failing to produce
identity documents. High-ranking police
officials made discriminatory and stigmatizing
statements about women engaged in sex
work in June, referring to the need to
“cleanse” the streets and encouraged
“community patrols” to photograph people
Amnesty International Report 2016/17they believed to be sex workers and pass the
photographs to the police. This risked
increased intimidation and violence towards
sex workers from nationalist groups and other
non-state actors that had targeted sex
workers in the past.
NGOs working with sex workers found that
women engaged in sex work faced barriers in
accessing health care, including reproductive
and sexual health services. Sex work is highly
stigmatized in Kyrgyzstan. Health care
providers discriminated against sex workers
by denying them treatment or offering low
quality treatment, and by not respecting
confidentiality. Many sex workers did not
have identity documents, which are difficult
to replace without registration at a permanent
address. Lack of identity documents also
limited sex workers’ access to health care
and other essential services.
IMPUNITY
Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment, and lack of
accountability for these human rights
violations, remained commonplace. Court
cases involving accusations of torture often
dragged on for months or years.
The authorities failed to make a genuine
effort to effectively investigate the June 2010
inter-ethnic violence in southern Kyrgyzstan.
While violence was used by members of both
ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbek communities, and
while the latter sustained most deaths,
injuries and damage, prosecutions were
disproportionately aimed at members of the
ethnic Uzbek community.
No one was held responsible for the death
of Usmanzhan Khalmirzaev, an ethnic Uzbek
with Russian citizenship who died of his
injuries in August 2011 after being detained
and beaten by police. On 22 July, a judge at
Chui Regional Court upheld the October
2015 acquittal of the four police officers
suspected of being implicated in his death,
on grounds of lack of evidence.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Domestic violence, forced marriage, and
other forms of violence against women and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
girls remained pervasive. In most cases,
women who survived violence did not go to
the police, due to social stigma and
discriminatory attitudes, and because they
had little faith in the police and justice
system. Lack of economic opportunities
made it difficult for women to leave abusive
relationships and live independently,
particularly if they wanted to take their
children with them.
According to the National Statistics
Committee, 4,960 cases of domestic violence
were registered in the period between
January and October of which 158 cases
proceeded to criminal prosecution.
A law that will help protect adolescent girls
from early and forced marriages passed its
final parliamentary reading in October and
was signed into law by the President on 18
November. The law introduces criminal
sanctions of up to five years’ imprisonment
for anyone involved in organizing or officiating
at a religious marriage ceremony where one
or both of the spouses is under the age of 18.
This will include religious leaders, as well as
parents of the would-be spouses.
LAOS
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Head of state: Bounnhang Vorachith (replaced
Choummaly Sayasone in April)
Head of government: Thongloun Sisoulith (replaced
Thongsing Thammavong in April)
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly
remained severely restricted. State control
of media and civil society was tightened as
Laos hosted international meetings.
Repression of human rights defenders
continued. Two prisoners of conscience
were released in March after being held for
almost 17 years.
There was no progress in the investigation
into the enforced disappearance in 2012 of
a civil society member. The death penalty
remained mandatory for serious drug
offences.
227BACKGROUND
The ruling Lao People’s Revolutionary Party
appointed a new General Secretary and
Politburo in its internal leadership ballot in
January. National Assembly elections in
March were followed by the appointment of a
President and Prime Minister. Laos remained
a one-party state.
UN Special Procedures expressed serious
concerns about the potential impact of the
Don Sahong Dam on the livelihood of millions
of people in Laos and downstream countries,
including the threat to rights to adequate
food, housing, information and participation
and the rights of Indigenous People.
Laos also held the Chair of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 2016.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The fate of Sombath Somphone, a prominent
civil society member, remained unclarified
since his abduction in 2012 outside a police
post in the capital, Vientiane. CCTV cameras
captured his being stopped by police and
driven away.
Authorities failed to provide information on
the whereabouts of Kha Yang, a Lao ethnic
Hmong, arrested after his second forced
return from Thailand in 2011. He was also
forcibly returned in 2009, although he had
been granted refugee status by the UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, and fled back to
Thailand in 2011.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Civil society organizations continued to be
under stringent state control.
In January, a decree restricted the press
activities of international media and other
bodies. Provisions included a requirement to
submit materials for state approval before
publishing. In November the 2008 Media
Law was amended to ensure that the media
strictly adhered to and promoted government
policies.
In line with Decree 327 which prohibits
online criticism of the state, the authorities
continued to monitor internet activity. In
August a Public Security Ministry official
228
stated that police were monitoring Facebook
for anyone connected to three detained
activists − Lodkham Thammavong,
Somphone Phimmasone and Soukan
Chaithad.
Laos cancelled its hosting of the ASEAN
Civil Society Conference/ASEAN People’s
Forum, citing insufficient funds and the risk
of foreign civil society actors using the event
to criticize ASEAN-member governments.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Lodkham Thammavong, Somphone
Phimmasone and Soukan Chaithad were
arrested in March after returning from
Thailand. Reports indicated they were
detained incommunicado for at least six
months and denied legal representation. 1
They were accused of threatening national
security in relation to online criticism of the
Lao government while in Thailand. They had
also participated in a peaceful demonstration
outside the Lao Embassy in Bangkok in
2015. In May, state television showed them
apologizing for their actions and confessing to
protesting against government policies.
Somphone Phimmasone’s family visited him
briefly in jail in September. All three
individuals remained in detention at the end
of the year.
LAND DISPUTES
Reports of land disputes between the state
and individuals continued. Mechanisms for
resolving land complaints were inadequate.
1. Laos: Three Lao activists held incommunicado (ASA 26/4603/2016)
LATVIA
Republic of Latvia
Head of state: Raimonds Vējonis
Head of government: Māris Kučinskis (replaced
Laimdota Straujuma in February)
The Council of Europe and the UN raised
serious concerns about the situation of
children with disabilities. Over 247,000
Amnesty International Report 2016/17people remained stateless. Individuals
continued to be at risk of refoulement.
DISCRIMINATION
Stateless persons
The number of stateless persons continued
to be high – over 247,000 as of July, the
latest published government data. Stateless
people, the vast majority ethnic Russians,
were excluded from enjoying political rights.
Rights of people with disabilities
Following a five-day visit to Latvia in
September, the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights raised
concerns about the situation of persons with
disabilities in institutions, in particular that of
children with intellectual and psychosocial
disabilities. His comments echoed the
concerns of the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child which, in March, called for the
government to set up comprehensive
measures to ensure that inclusive education
is given priority over the placement of
children with disabilities in specialized
institutions.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The number of asylum applications remained
low, with about 350 received during the year.
The European Commission criticized the
government for rejecting relocation requests
of asylum-seekers from other European
countries without providing substantiated
reasons or for rejecting requests on
unjustified grounds. By the end of the year,
Latvia had relocated 148 asylum-seekers
under the EU relocation and resettlement
scheme. Concerns remained about the non-
suspensive effect of appeals against negative
decisions under the accelerated asylum
procedure. The procedure increases the risk
of individuals being returned to countries
where they could face serious human rights
violations.
In March, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child raised concerns about the
detention of asylum-seeking children during
the asylum-seeking procedure and called on
the government to end the practice.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
LEBANON
Lebanese Republic
Head of state: Michel Aoun (assumed office in October)
Head of government: Saad Hariri (replaced Tammam
Salam in December)
The human rights situation continued to be
affected by the armed conflict in Syria.
Lebanon hosted more than 1 million
refugees from Syria, but the authorities
severely restricted their right to asylum and
maintained restrictions that effectively
closed Lebanon’s borders to those fleeing
Syria. Most refugees faced severe economic
hardship. Women were discriminated
against in law and practice and were
inadequately protected against sexual and
other violence. Migrant workers faced
exploitation and abuse. The authorities took
no steps to investigate the fate of thousands
of people who disappeared or went missing
during the conflict of 1975 to 1990. Long-
resident Palestinian refugees continued to
face discrimination. Parliament approved a
new law to establish a National Human
Rights Institute. Courts continued to
impose death sentences; there were no
executions.
BACKGROUND
Tensions between the main political parties
caused continued political impasse. However,
in October, the Parliament elected a new
president; the presidency had been vacant
since May 2014. Public protests against the
government’s continued failure to implement
sustainable solutions to the country’s waste
collection and disposal problems diminished
compared with 2015.
Security conditions deteriorated; there
were bomb attacks in the capital Beirut and
in Beqaa governorate. Suicide bombers killed
five people and wounded 28 others, mostly
civilians, on 27 June in the predominantly
Christian village of Qaa in the Beqaa Valley.
The army detained dozens of refugees
following the attacks in Qaa, accusing them
of having irregular status in Lebanon.
229Lebanese border areas continued to come
under fire from Syria, where the armed group
Islamic State (IS) continued to hold Lebanese
soldiers and security officials that its forces
abducted from Lebanon in 2014.
In September, judicial authorities indicted
two Syrian government intelligence officers.
They were accused of committing
simultaneous bomb attacks in 2013 at two
mosques in the northern city of Tripoli, in
which 42 people were killed and some 600
injured, mostly civilians. Neither of those
indicted had been apprehended by the end
of 2016.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In October the Parliament approved a new
law to establish a National Human Rights
Institute, including a committee to investigate
the use of torture and other ill-treatment in all
places of detention, including prisons, police
stations and immigrant detention sites.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Lebanon hosted more than 1 million refugees
from Syria in addition to some 280,000 long-
term Palestinian refugees and more than
20,000 refugees from Iraq, Sudan, Ethiopia
and other countries.
Lebanon again failed to become party to
the 1951 UN Refugee Convention and its
1967 Protocol. Refugees from Syria
continued to face serious restrictions on their
right to seek asylum, as the Lebanese
authorities did not formally recognize them as
refugees. The authorities also maintained
strict criteria introduced in January 2015 and
denied entry to all refugees from Syria who
did not meet the criteria, effectively closing
Lebanon’s borders to people fleeing the
armed conflict and persecution in Syria. A
government decision from May 2015
continued to bar UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, from registering newly arrived
refugees. Within Lebanon, Syrian refugees
faced financial and administrative difficulties
in obtaining or renewing residency permits,
exposing them to a constant risk of arbitrary
arrest, detention and forcible return to Syria.
They also faced severe economic hardship.
230
According to the UN, 70% of Syrian refugee
households lived below the poverty line and
more than half lived in substandard
conditions in overcrowded buildings and
densely populated neighbourhoods.
The UN humanitarian appeal for Syrian
refugees in Lebanon was only 52% funded
by the end of the year and resettlement
places in other countries remained
inadequate. Cuts in funding led the UN to
reduce both the amount of its support to
Syrian refugees in Lebanon and the number
in receipt of UN support.
On 8 January, security officials at Beirut
Airport forcibly returned more than 100
Syrians to Syria, in violation of the principle of
non-refoulement. The returned refugees had
been seeking to travel to Turkey via Lebanon.
Palestinian refugees, including many long-
resident in Lebanon, remained subject to
discriminatory laws that deny them the right
to own or inherit property and access public
education and health services, and that
prevent them from working in at least 35
professions. At least 3,000 Palestinian
refugees who did not hold official identity
documents faced further restrictions denying
them the right to register births, marriages
and deaths.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women remained subject to personal status
laws that retained discriminatory provisions
pertaining to marriage, divorce, child custody
and inheritance. The nationality law
continued to prevent Lebanese women
married to foreign nationals from passing on
their nationality to their children. The same
law did not apply to Lebanese men.
Women remained unprotected from
marital rape, which the 2013 Law on
Protection of Women and Family Members
from Domestic Violence failed to criminalize.
This law was used in 2016 to charge the
husbands of Roula Yaacoub and Manal Assi
for beating their wives to death in 2013 and
2014 respectively; the latter was sentenced
to death, which was reduced in July to five
years in prison.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Syrian and Palestinian refugee women
from Syria faced serious human rights
abuses, including gender-based violence,
exploitation and sexual harassment,
particularly in public places. Refugee women
heads of households were especially at risk of
harassment by men if they had no adult male
relatives residing with them. Many refugee
women from Syria lacked valid residence
permits and, as a result, feared reporting
sexual harassment or other abuse to the
Lebanese authorities. disappeared or went missing during the civil
war of 1975 to 1990 and who may have been
unlawfully killed. This failure perpetuated the
suffering of the families of the disappeared,
who continued to face administrative, legal,
social and economic hurdles resulting from
the enforced disappearance of their relatives.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS LESOTHO
Migrant workers were excluded from the
protections provided to other workers under
the Labour Law, exposing them to labour
exploitation and physical, sexual and
psychological abuse by their employers.
Migrant domestic workers, mostly women,
remained especially vulnerable under the
kafala sponsorship system that ties workers
to their employer.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
Special Tribunal for Lebanon
The Netherlands-based Special Tribunal for
Lebanon (STL) continued to try in their
absence four men accused of complicity in
the killing of former Lebanese Prime Minister
Rafic Hariri and others in a 2005 car
bombing in Beirut. The four continued to
evade arrest. A fifth accused died in Syria.
On 8 March, the STL Appeals Panel
acquitted Lebanese journalist Karma Khayat
and her employer Al Jadeed TV of contempt
of court. On 15 July, the STL charged al-
Akhbar newspaper and its editor-in-chief,
Ibrahim al-Amine, with contempt of court for
failing to comply with a court order requiring
them to remove information concerning
confidential witnesses and obstruction of
justice. On 29 August the court sentenced
Ibrahim al-Amine to a fine of €20,000 and al-
Akhbar newspaper to a fine of €6,000.
IMPUNITY
The government again failed to establish an
independent national body to investigate the
fate of thousands of people who were forcibly
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
DEATH PENALTY
Courts imposed at least 107 death sentences
for terrorism-related crimes. No executions
have been carried out since 2004.
Kingdom of Lesotho
Head of state: King Letsie III
Head of government: Pakalitha Mosisili
Political instability persisted following an
attempted coup in 2014 and the killing of a
former army chief in 2015. Several
opposition party members remained in
exile. The right to freedom of expression
remained severely limited. Journalists faced
intimidation, physical attacks and politically
motivated criminal charges in relation to
their work, prompting several to flee the
country. The rights to health and an
adequate standard of living were
undermined.
POLITICAL INSTABILITY
The report of the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC)
Commission of Inquiry into instability in
Lesotho was made public in February.
Among other things, the inquiry looked into
the killing by soldiers of Lieutenant-General
Maaparankoe Mahao in June 2015 following
his dismissal from the Lesotho Defence Force
(LDF) and replacement by Lieutenant-
General Tlali Kamoli. The soldiers said that
Maaparankoe Mahao fired on them when
they attempted to arrest him on suspicion of
plotting a mutiny in the army. The SADC
report found no evidence that Maaparankoe
Mahao had planned a mutiny and concluded
that he was deliberately killed. It
231recommended criminal investigations into the
killing and the dismissal of Tlali Kamoli. The
government announced Tlali Kamoli’s
retirement effective from 1 December.
Prime Minister Mosisili commissioned a
joint task force, comprising members of the
police and army, to investigate the
circumstances of the killing. Maaparankoe
Mahao’s family dismissed it as lacking
impartiality.
The SADC summit in June urged
opposition leaders who had fled Lesotho after
receiving death threats in 2015 to return by
August to participate in constitutional and
security reforms recommended by the SADC.
In November, the government introduced an
Amnesty Bill which if passed would enable
impunity for serious human rights violations.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Fifteen LDF members charged with sedition
and mutiny in May 2015 remained held at
Maseru Maximum Security Prison, even
though the SADC inquiry found no conclusive
evidence of a mutiny and recommended that
the soldiers be released. 1 In October 2015
the High Court had ordered the release of all
the soldiers on “open arrest” − a form of
military bail − but only seven were released.
Tlali Kamoli was charged with contempt of
court after failing to comply with the court
order. On 29 April, the Appeals Court
rejected a request by the remaining soldiers
to be placed under “open arrest”, thereby
overruling the High Court order. The court
martial of the detained soldiers was
repeatedly postponed.
All five lawyers representing the soldiers
faced death threats. 2 One of the lawyers was
arrested and charged with perjury allegedly
committed while representing the detained
soldiers. Additional charges of fraud,
contempt of court and obstruction of justice
were added to his indictment.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The imprisoned LDF soldiers continued to
face cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment. 3 After a march organized by the
detainees’ children on 16 June, some of the
232
soldiers were held in solitary confinement
and denied food. One was denied specialized
medical treatment and some were shackled.
Makoae Taoana, a medical doctor who
examined the soldiers after their arrest and
torture, died in an unexplained accident in
July. Police announced they were
investigating the circumstances of his death.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists working in broadcast, print and
social media continued to face physical
attacks and harassment. On 23 June, after
publishing an article that alleged that Tlali
Kamoli was to receive an exit package of R50
million (US$3.5 million), Lesotho Times
reporter Keiso Mohloboli was interrogated at
Maseru police headquarters and asked to
disclose her sources. The following day she
was arrested and interrogated along with the
newspaper’s editor, Lloyd Mutungamiri. On 5
July, Lloyd Mutungamiri and Lesotho Times
publisher Basildon Peta were interrogated.
Basildon Peta was charged with criminal
defamation and a related offence. The
charges arose from a column that satirized
Tlali Kamoli. On 9 July, unidentified gunmen
attacked and injured Lloyd Mutungamiri in
his driveway. There was no known
investigation into the incident. Lloyd
Mutungamiri had been charged with criminal
defamation in September 2014 for reporting
on police corruption; no further action was
known to have been taken. Keiso Mohloboli
fled Lesotho, fearing for her life.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The public health care system faced a
deepening crisis, largely due to debts owed to
South Africa and the World Bank relating to
the provision of health care. Patients unable
to afford new hospital charges imposed
because of debt repayments were told to
access free health care in neighbouring
South Africa, but without help for travel costs.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
Villagers, livestock and ancestral graves were
resettled in Mokhotlong town during the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17ongoing construction of Polihali Dam, a major
project in Lesotho designed to supply water
to South Africa. The limited space offered in
Mokhotlong meant that villagers lost their
livelihoods, which were based on livestock
and subsistence farming. People living near
the dam continued to have no access to
piped clean water and electricity.
1. Lesotho: Call for immediate release of detained soldiers following the
report of SADC Commission of Inquiry on Lesotho (AFR 33/3444/2016)
2. Lesotho: Trial of 23 soldiers postponed again (AFR 33/3481/2016)
3. Lesotho: Continued ill-treatment of detained soldiers (AFR
33/4411/2016)
LIBYA
State of Libya
Head of state: Disputed
Head of government: Fayez Serraj
Rival government forces and other armed
groups and militias committed serious
violations of international law and abuses of
human rights with impunity. All sides to the
conflict carried out indiscriminate attacks
and direct attacks on civilians, forcing
thousands to become internally displaced
and causing a humanitarian crisis.
Thousands of people continued to be
detained without trial in the absence of a
functioning justice system, and torture and
other ill-treatment were rife. Armed groups
including Islamic State (IS) abducted,
detained and killed civilians and severely
curtailed the rights to freedom of expression
and assembly. Women faced discrimination
and were subjected to sexual and other
violence, particularly by IS. Refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants faced serious
abuses, including indefinite detention and
torture and other ill-treatment by the
authorities, armed groups and people
smugglers. The death penalty remained in
force; no executions were reported.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
BACKGROUND
Libya remained deeply divided as rival
governments continued to vie for political
legitimacy and assert control against a
background of economic collapse and
widespread lawlessness in which armed
groups and militias abducted people for
ransom and committed unlawful killings with
impunity.
The Presidency Council of a UN-backed
Government of National Accord (GNA)
entered the capital, Tripoli, in March and
seized power from the National Salvation
Government (NSG) with support from armed
groups from western cities and towns who
previously backed the NSG. The NSG
continued to claim legitimacy and
unsuccessfully sought to reclaim power by
force in October. The GNA failed to
consolidate power amid continued sporadic
clashes between armed groups, including in
areas it controlled, while its legitimacy
remained contested by Libya’s recognized
parliament, the House of Representatives
(HOR) based in Tobruk.
The HOR-affiliated Libyan National Army
(LNA), an armed group composed of former
army units and tribal militias, commanded by
retired army General Khalifa Haftar,
consolidated its power and made significant
territorial gains in the east. The LNA replaced
some elected municipal council heads with
military-appointed governors in areas they
controlled, while their forces captured vital oil
terminals from a GNA-allied armed group in
September. The LNA continued to participate
in fighting against the Shura Council of
Benghazi Revolutionaries (SCBR) armed
group in Benghazi, and conducted air strikes
in Derna.
IS controlled parts of the coastal city of
Sirte and contested other areas. In February,
a US air strike on an alleged IS training camp
in the western city of Sabratha reportedly
killed up to 50 people, including two Serbian
nationals held hostage by IS. In May, GNA
forces composed mostly of armed groups
from Misrata began an offensive against IS
positions in Sirte, supported by US air strikes
233in August, and gained control of the city in
early December.
In April the Constitution Drafting Assembly
issued a revised draft constitution to be
approved by national referendum, but no
date for the referendum had been set by the
end of the year.
The UN Security Council extended the
mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) until 15
September 2017.
INTERNAL ARMED CONFLICT
Indiscriminate shelling and direct attacks on
civilians
Armed groups on all sides of the conflict
committed war crimes, including direct
attacks on civilians and indiscriminate
attacks using imprecise weapons such as
mortars and artillery shells, killing and
injuring scores of people. IS carried out
indiscriminate attacks using improvised
explosive devices and suicide bombings
against pro-GNA forces.
In Benghazi, the LNA shelled and
launched air strikes in the suburb of
Ganfouda and other civilian areas under
SCBR control and the SCBR shelled other
densely populated civilian areas. A LNA air
strike on 1 July killed two civilians in
Ganfouda. On 4 October, indiscriminate
shelling apparently by SCBR forces killed
three civilians in Sidi Hussein, central
Benghazi.
Some attacks by armed groups and
militias in Benghazi targeted hospitals and
other civilian buildings. They included a car
bomb attack on 24 June at al-Jalaa hospital
that killed five and wounded 13, mostly
civilians.
LNA air strikes killed civilians in the
eastern city of Derna while targeting al-
Qa’ida-linked armed groups in the city. In
June, LNA air strikes killed six civilians,
including children, according to UNSMIL.
Fighting between rival armed groups in
Tripoli, al-Zawiya and other cities in western
Libya, as well as tribal fighting in southern
Libya, also caused deaths and injuries among
civilians. On 16 October, indiscriminate
234
shelling between GNA forces and pro-NSG
armed groups hit a camp for internally
displaced people in Tripoli, killing one civilian
and injuring others.
Humanitarian impact
The conflict had a devastating impact on
civilians, cutting or severely curtailing their
access to food, health care, education,
electricity, fuel and water supplies, and
causing many to be displaced from their
homes. Economic collapse left many
struggling to support their families.
The World Health Organization reported in
April that Libya’s health care system had
virtually collapsed and in June estimated that
almost 60% of public hospitals in areas of
conflict had shut down or become
inaccessible.
Hundreds of civilians remained trapped
without access to clean water, food, power or
medical care in Benghazi’s Ganfouda area
due to fighting.
In October, the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
estimated that 1.3 million people across
Libya were in need of humanitarian
assistance.
Abductions and hostage-taking
Armed groups, including some operating
under Libya’s rival governments, abducted
and detained civilians on account of their
origin, opinions and perceived political or
tribal affiliations. Rising criminality in the
absence of a functioning justice system also
saw armed groups and gangs abducting
civilians for ransom in Tripoli and other cities.
Those abducted included political, human
rights and other activists, journalists, and
judicial and other public officials. Some
foreign nationals were targeted based on their
religion, race or nationality. Some were
released after payment of ransoms or local
mediation.
Some armed groups continued to hold
civilians abducted in 2014 as hostages for
use in prisoner exchanges. In September, a
Zintan-based armed group released
Suleiman al-Zubi, a former member of Libya’s
Amnesty International Report 2016/17General National Congress abducted in
2014, reportedly in exchange for Zintani
prisoners held in Misrata.
IS abducted and detained members of
opposing armed groups and civilians,
including foreign nationals employed in the
oil industry, migrant workers and refugees.
Other armed groups also targeted foreign
nationals for abduction for ransoms. Victims
included two Italians and a Canadian
abducted on 19 September while working in
Ghat, southwest Libya. They were freed in
early November.
Unlawful killings
Armed groups, including some affiliated to
the rival governments, committed unlawful
killings of captured opposition fighters and
civilians they perceived as opponents.
In February, IS forces reportedly beheaded
11 members of a local security force whom
they had captured in Sabratha.
In June, 12 men detained in connection
with alleged offences during Mu’ammar al-
Gaddafi’s rule were reportedly shot dead
shortly after their release from Tripoli’s al-
Baraka Prison, run by the Ministry of Justice.
They appeared to be victims of extrajudicial
execution.
In July the bodies of 14 men were found
dumped in al-Laithi, an area of Benghazi that
the LNA had recaptured from the SCBR. The
men’s hands and legs had been tied and they
had been shot dead by unidentified
perpetrators.
Libya’s rival governments failed to conduct
independent or effective investigations into
such killings or hold those responsible to
account.
IMPUNITY
Impunity continued to prevail, although in
January Libya’s Public Prosecutor informed
the International Criminal Court (ICC) that
arrest warrants had been issued against three
officials accused of torturing As-Saadi al-
Gaddafi in detention. It remained unclear
whether those accused were arrested and
prosecuted. The head of al-Hadba Prison,
who was suspended after the torture of As-
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Saadi al-Gaddafi, was reportedly restored to
his position.
In November the ICC committed to
prioritize its investigations in 2017 into
ongoing crimes in Libya, including those
committed by IS and other armed groups,
and issue new arrest warrants. However, the
ICC initiated no new investigations in 2016,
citing security concerns and insufficient
resources.
Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, against whom the
ICC issued a Warrant of Arrest in relation to
alleged crimes against humanity committed
during the 2011 conflict, continued to be
detained by a militia in Zintan.
None of the parties to the conflict
implemented any human rights provisions of
the UN-brokered Libya Political Agreement of
December 2015, including those obliging
them to release detainees held without legal
basis.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
By August the number of internally displaced
people in Libya had risen to almost 350,000,
according to the International Organization
for Migration (IOM). This included an
estimated 40,000 former residents of
Tawargha who had been forced from their
homes five years earlier. In August, a
reconciliation agreement between Misrata
and Tawargha representatives aimed to
facilitate their return to the town.
Most of Sirte’s civilian inhabitants fled the
city at the time of the GNA offensive against
IS in May. The fighting caused extensive
damage but some residents were able to
return. Conflict in Benghazi and tribal fighting
in southern Libya also caused population
displacement.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Armed groups and militias continued to
harass, abduct, torture and kill human rights
defenders, political and other activists and
journalists.
In March, unidentified assailants killed
human rights activist Abdul Basit Abu-Dahab
in a car bombing in Derna. The same month,
235members of an armed group ransacked the
offices of Tripoli’s al-Nabaa TV station and
assaulted journalists, and in al-Marj, eastern
Libya, armed men abducted blogger and
journalist Ali al-Asbali, releasing him four
months later.
In August, members of an armed group
briefly abducted al-Ahrar TV station journalist
Aboubaker Al-Bizanti in Tripoli after he
criticized the presence of armed groups and
militias in the capital.
People who attended public gatherings
and demonstrations faced attack. In May,
unidentified assailants fired mortars at
protesters demonstrating in al-Kish Square,
Benghazi, killing six civilians.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The justice system remained in a state of
collapse, with courts unable to process
thousands of untried detainees’ cases, some
dating from 2011. Thousands of detainees
continued to be held without trial in official
prisons and detention facilities and in
unofficial prisons run by armed groups. Some
detainees were freed in amnesties, including
17 men held in Misrata who were released in
March.
The trial of As-Saadi al-Gaddafi continued
to be postponed while he remained detained
at al-Hadba Prison, Tripoli. In April, the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
declared that his detention and that of 11
other former al-Gaddafi-era officials was
arbitrary and without legal basis.
At the end of the year, the Supreme Court
had still to review the death sentences
imposed on Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, Abdallah
al-Senussi and seven other former officials in
2015.
Torture and other ill-treatment
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
common and widespread and was committed
with impunity, especially upon arrest or
abduction and during detention in official and
unofficial prisons.
Conditions deteriorated in official prisons
including al-Hadba, al-Baraka and others,
where those held included former high-level
236
al-Gaddafi-era officials. Inadequate health
care and food led to a decline in many
inmates’ health, while torture was reportedly
used to punish inmates.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Refugees and migrants were subjected to
serious abuses by armed groups, people
smugglers and traffickers, and guards in
government-run detention centres.
The IOM said in October that it had
identified 276,957 migrants in Libya but
estimated the true number to be between
700,000 and 1 million. UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, had registered 38,241
refugees by the end of the year.
Libyan law continued to criminalize foreign
nationals who irregularly enter, leave or
remain in the country. Many actual and
suspected irregular migrants and asylum-
seekers were seized at checkpoints and in
house raids or reported to the authorities by
their employers. Thousands were held in
indefinite detention pending deportation in
facilities of the Department for Combating
Irregular Migration (DCIM). Although they
formally reported to the Ministry of the
Interior, DCIM detention facilities were often
run by armed groups outside the effective
control of the GNA. Those detained were held
in squalid conditions and were subject to
torture and other ill-treatment by guards,
including beatings, shootings, exploitation
and sexual violence. UNHCR reported that
there were 24 migrant detention centres
across Libya.
On 1 April, guards shot dead at least four
people seeking to escape from al-Nasr
migrant detention centre in al-Zawiya.
Thousands of refugees, asylum-seekers
and migrants sought to flee Libya and cross
the Mediterranean Sea to Europe in
unseaworthy craft provided by people
smugglers. The UN estimated that 5,022
people had died while trying to cross the
Mediterranean from North Africa by the end
of the year, mostly departing from Libya.
The EU renewed its anti-smuggling naval
mission “Operation Sophia” in June,
extending its mandate to include training for
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Libya’s coastguard service, which began in
October. The Libyan coastguard intercepted
thousands of those seeking to cross the
Mediterranean, returning them to Libya and
indefinite detention in the DCIM-run facilities.
At times the coastguard committed abuses,
including shooting at and abandoning boats
at sea, and beating migrants and refugees
aboard their vessels and on shore. By 18
December, the Libyan coastguard had
intercepted and/or rescued more than
14,038 people, according to UNHCR.
Refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants
were subjected to serious human rights
abuses by criminal gangs, including
abduction, extortion, sexual violence and
killing. IS also abducted refugees and
migrants, forcing some to convert to Islam,
and sexually abused migrant and refugee
women reportedly subjecting some to forced
marriage. In October the IOM reported that
71% of migrants who took the central
Mediterranean route from Africa to Europe
said they had experienced practices
amounting to human trafficking, with 49%
having faced abduction and extortion in
Libya.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice and were marginalized
socially, politically and economically. The
draft constitution published in April proposed
to guarantee women 25% of HOR and local
council seats for 12 years.
In Sirte and other areas that they
controlled, IS and other armed groups
imposed strict interpretations of Shari’a law
that restricted women’s movement and dress,
and reportedly sanctioned the practice of
child marriage.
Armed groups also threatened and
harassed women who engaged in public
activism.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for a
wide range of crimes; no executions were
reported.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
LITHUANIA
Republic of Lithuania
Head of state: Dalia Grybauskaitė
Head of government: Saulius Skvernelis (replaced
Algirdas Butkevičius in November)
The 2016 Baltic Pride March for Equality in
Vilnius took place without serious incidents.
A Saudi Arabian national who alleged he
was tortured and held in secret CIA
detention in Lithuania was denied victim
status, putting an end to his domestic
appeal process.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In June, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) held a hearing in a case
against Lithuania for complicity in the US-led
rendition and secret detention programmes,
which the CIA operated globally in the
aftermath of the 11 September 2001 attacks
in the USA. 1 Abu Zubaydah, a stateless
Palestinian born in Saudi Arabia and
detained at the US detention centre
at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba,lodged an
application against Lithuania in 2011. He
alleged he had been forcibly disappeared
and tortured at a secret CIA detention centre
in Antaviliai between 2005 and 2006, and
that Lithuania had failed to effectively
investigate his secret detention. A judgment
in the case remained pending at the end of
2016.
In June, the Vilnius Regional Court ruled
that Mustafa al-Hawsawi, a Saudi Arabian
national detained at Guantánamo Bay, would
not be granted victim status in a domestic
investigation into Lithuanian complicity in the
same CIA programmes. Mustafa al-Hawsawi
claimed he had been held at the secret CIA
detention site at Antaviliai, subjected to
enforced disappearance and tortured
between 2004 and 2006. In December,
he lodged an application at the ECtHR
against Lithuania.
237RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
On 18 June, 3,000 people joined the March
for Equality in Vilnius to celebrate Baltic Pride
2016. The march took place without serious
incidents and with adequate police
protection.
On 28 June, the Lithuanian
Parliament voted in favour of a proposal to
amend the Constitution to restrict the
definition of “family” under Article 38 to
exclude same-sex couples. The process
would require two votes in Parliament before
the amendment could be officially adopted.
DISCRIMINATION – PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES
In May, the Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities issued several
recommendations and raised a range of
concerns, including around access to
education and systemic barriers to access
to health services.
1. CIA rendition victims challenge Romania and Lithuania at Europe’s
Human Rights Court (News story, 29 June)
MACEDONIA
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Head of state: Gjorge Ivanov
Head of government: Emil Dimitriev (replaced Nikola
Gruevski in January)
revealing government corruption and
widespread illegal surveillance continued. A
transitional technical government composed
of majority and opposition MPs was formed
after a political agreement was brokered with
EU and US assistance.
In April, the President announced a
pardon for 56 high-level political figures
under investigation for their involvement in
the wire-tapping scandal. The pardons were
revoked by the President in June following a
wave of protests dubbed the “colourful
revolution”.
Parliamentary elections eventually took
place in December after being called and
postponed several times. The previous ruling
party (Internal Macedonian Revolutionary
Organization – Democratic Party for
Macedonian National Unity) returned to
power. The main opposition party, narrowly
failing to acquire the majority of votes,
disputed the end result.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The Special Public Prosecutor appointed by
Parliament in September 2015 to investigate
officials involved in the wire-tapping scandal
and crimes by political figures continued to
face pressure in carrying out her work. In
October, the transitional Parliament rejected
a proposal to extend the Prosecutor’s June
2017 deadline for concluding all
investigations and to improve access to
witness protection services for witnesses
involved in her office’s investigations.
DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
Prosecutions following the 2015 revelations
of high-level corruption were slowed down
by political infighting while witness
protection was limited. Roma faced
discrimination in accessing basic rights and
services. Refugees and migrants were
routinely pushed back at the border with
Greece or faced detention in poor facilities
in Macedonia.
BACKGROUND
The political crisis prompted by the
publication in 2015 of audio recordings
238
In September, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) communicated to Macedonia
a complaint in relation to 53 Roma
individuals who challenged their forced
eviction from the “Polygon” settlement in
Skopje in August which left them in tents and
makeshift shelters on the outskirts of the
capital.
About 600 refugees, mainly Roma, who
had fled Kosovo in 1999-2000, remained at
risk of losing their access to livelihoods and
other rights as the authorities continued to
revoke their right to stay in the country on
Amnesty International Report 2016/17dubious grounds related to national security.
By the end of the year, over 80 of them
(including 30 children) had their protection
status withdrawn after failing routine security
checks carried out as part of the annual
renewal of their temporary protection status.
The substance of the security assessments
was not shared with applicants and could not
be challenged in courts. A Roma woman
whose protection status was not renewed
subsequently lodged an appeal at the ECtHR.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In early March, the Ministry of Interior
announced the closure of the country’s
southern border with Greece, thereby
preventing the arrival of refugees and
migrants to the country (see Greece entry).
Until their eviction in May, thousands were
stranded in the Idomeni makeshift camp on
the Greek side of the border. Throughout the
year, the authorities continued to return
refugees and migrants summarily to Greece,
sometimes violently. UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, did not register official new
arrivals following the March border closure,
as refugees and migrants barred from
entering the country were pushed back or
continued their journeys into Macedonia
clandestinely.
In September, eight complainants from
Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan submitted an
application to the ECtHR to challenge their
summary expulsion in March from
Macedonia to Greece.
Also in September, the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights criticized
the authorities for leaving hundreds of
refugees and migrants – who had arrived
before the border closure – stranded in
inadequate transit centres at the southern
and northern land borders and in the Gazi
Baba detention centre for foreigners in
Skopje. The de facto detention of irregular
migrants and asylum-seekers continued to be
implemented without lawful grounds and
without detainees being able to challenge the
legality of their detention.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
MADAGASCAR
Republic of Madagascar
Head of state: Hery Rajaonarimampianina
Head of government: Olivier Mahafaly Solonandrasana
(replaced Jean Ravelonarivo in April)
Poverty was widespread, with extensive
malnutrition and deteriorating primary
health care. Children’s rights were routinely
flouted. Human rights violations by police
were committed with impunity and corrupt
officials were involved in trafficking
activities. Discrimination against women in
law and practice continued. The right to
freedom of expression was restricted. Prison
conditions remained dire.
BACKGROUND
Madagascar struggled to overcome the
instability resulting from its five-year political
crisis. In April, following weeks of political
conflict, Olivier Mahafaly Solonandrasana
replaced Jean Ravelonarivo as Prime
Minister.
Extreme levels of poverty were widespread,
with approximately 91% of the population
living on less than US$2 per day. A drought
in the south aggravated an already dire
humanitarian situation. According to UN
agencies, 1.2 million people (around 80% of
the population) living in the south were food
insecure, of whom 600,000 were severely
food insecure.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
Neonatal and maternal mortality remained
very high, and the deterioration of the
primary health care system was a major
barrier to accessing even basic health
services. Limited access to clean water and
poor sanitation and hygiene practices were of
particular concern, particularly given the level
of chronic malnutrition.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In Madagascar, 47% of all children suffer
from stunting, and nearly 10% from acute
malnutrition.
239As families sought to cope with the impact
of the drought, there were reports of alarming
increases in economic exploitation, with
children working in mines and leading cattle,
and instances of sexual exploitation and child
marriage. Drop out rates in primary schools
reached 40% in some communities,
according to UNICEF.
Child sex trafficking continued, often with
the involvement of family members, and was
most prevalent in tourist destinations and
near mining sites. the High Constitutional Court approved a
draft law on a new Code of Media
Communication. The contentious Code
punished with heavy fines offences such as
contempt, defamation or insult against a
government official.
Environmental activists reported threats
and harassment for publicizing issues such
as trafficking in rosewood and endangered
species. They denounced a lack of protection
by the government.
IMPUNITY Prison conditions continued to be dire, with
severe overcrowding and inadequate
infrastructure. Almost half of all prisoners
suffered moderate to severe malnutrition.
About half of prison inmates had not yet
been tried, with pre-trial detention often
exceeding the maximum potential sentence.
The government failed to ensure respect for
the rule of law, allowing human rights
violations to be committed with impunity.
Deadly clashes involving police, villagers and
armed cattle rustlers (dahalos) continued in
the southern region, leading to civilian
casualties.
Civil society organizations denounced the
lack of free and fair access to justice, the
corruption of government officials, and their
involvement in trafficking activities.
Madagascar continued to be a source
country for forced labour and sex trafficking.
Despite recent efforts, the government failed
to prevent trafficking, protect victims, and
prosecute suspected traffickers, including
complicit officials.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Nationality Law denied women the right
to transmit nationality to their children on an
equal basis with men, resulting in a large
number of stateless persons.
The predominance of customary laws
favoured harmful traditional practices
including arranged, forced and early
marriages. Women and girls continued to
suffer sexual or other physical violence, but
reporting rates were low and prosecutions
rare. Efforts to prevent gender-based violence
and to provide care and treatment for victims
remained inadequate.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
After months of protest from journalists and
international media organizations, in August
240
PRISON CONDITIONS
MALAWI
Republic of Malawi
Head of state and government: Arthur Peter Mutharika
Attacks against people with albinism
continued; at least seven people were killed
and their bodies mutilated. People with
albinism also continued to suffer social
isolation. Student protests over fee
increases were violently repressed. Political
opponents of the government were arrested
and charged with treason.
DISCRIMINATION – PEOPLE
WITH ALBINISM
People with albinism continued to be
subjected to violent attacks and mutilations. 1
Although senior government officials,
including the President, publicly condemned
the attacks, victims and their relatives
continued to be denied justice and
reparations.
In March, a Special Legal Counsel was
appointed to assist the prosecution of crimes
related to people with albinism. In July,
Parliament passed revisions to the Anatomy
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Act and Penal Code that increased the
penalties for the sale of body tissue and
possession of a dead body or human tissue.
They were signed into law in September.
At least seven people with albinism were
killed during 2016 and many more suffered
attacks. Among those killed by criminal
gangs were 23-month-old baby Whitney
Chilumpha and nine-year-old Harry
Mokoshoni.
In May, unidentified men killed and
mutilated Fletcher Masina, a man with
albinism, while he was working in his garden.
In July, Lucia Kainga was attacked and
had her right hand chopped off by
unidentified men in Mweneipenza 5 village,
bordering Tanzania. Her husband was tricked
into opening the door by an attacker
pretending to be in need of help.
On 19 August, a village headman was
arrested after attempting to sell a seven-year-
old boy with albinism in Phalombe district.
He was remanded in custody pending trial.
Societal ignorance and stigmatization also
contributed to people with albinism suffering
widespread denial of their economic, social
and cultural rights. This included: exclusion
from government poverty alleviation
programmes; lack of support in schools to
address bullying and learning difficulties;
failure to address their specific medical
needs; and lack of economic opportunities.
REPRESSION OF DISSENT
In February, three parliamentarians of the
Malawi Congress Party were arrested:
Congress spokesperson Jessie Kabwila.
Ulemu Msungama and Peter Chankwantha.
They were charged with treason in
connection with social media messages and
released on bail. Their arrest contravened
procedures protecting parliamentarians from
arrest.
In July, students from the University of
Malawi protested against a three fold rise in
tuition fees imposed by the government. At
Chancellor College in Zomba, police stormed
hostels and fired tear gas at students who
sought refuge in their rooms. A video showed
police slapping two women students. On 26
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
July, 14 students from Malawi Polytechnic
near Blantyre were arrested and charged with
conduct likely to breach the peace. They
were later released on bail. Eleven students
from Kamuzu College of Nursing were also
arrested and charged with “proposing
violence”. They were later released on bail.
1. Malawi: "We are not animals to be hunted or sold" − violence and
discrimination against people with albinism in Malawi (AFR
36/4126/2016)
MALAYSIA
Malaysia
Head of state: King Muhammad V (replaced King Abdul
Halim Mu’adzam Shah in October)
Head of government: Najib Tun Razak
The crackdown on the rights to freedom of
expression, of peaceful assembly and of
association persisted. Police were not held
accountable for human rights violations.
Former opposition leader and prisoner of
conscience Anwar Ibrahim, convicted on
trumped-up charges of “sodomy”, remained
in prison serving a five-year sentence.
Refugees and asylum-seekers fleeing
persecution faced prolonged detention in
poor conditions.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Restrictive laws such as the Sedition Act and
the Communications and Multimedia Act
continued to be used to silence government
critics, who were harassed, intimidated and
often detained.
In March, the independent news portal,
The Malaysian Insider, was shut down for
commercial reasons after being blocked by
the government. This was following critical
coverage of a corruption scandal linked to the
Prime Minister and the misappropriation of
hundreds of millions of US dollars from the
state-owned investment company 1Malaysia
Development Berhad (1MDB). 1
Prosecutions of political activists and
government critics persisted. In May, political
activist Hishamuddin Rais was found guilty
241by the Court of Appeal of sedition and fined
MYR5,000 (US$1,140) for calling for
electoral reform. 2 Student activist Adam Adli
received the same fine for the same charge.
Youth activist Mohd Fakhrulrazi was
sentenced to eight months’ imprisonment for
sedition after calling for Anwar Ibrahim’s
release from prison.
The Communications and Multimedia Act
was increasingly used to target government
critics and dissidents. In June, activist Fahmi
Reza was charged twice under the Act for
depicting the Prime Minister as a clown in a
caricature. Muhammad Amirul Zakwan
pleaded guilty to making insulting comments
about the Prince of Johor on Facebook and
was sentenced to two years in reform school.
At least three others were either charged,
detained or investigated for social media
posts criticizing the Prince.
Arbitrary travel bans were imposed on
three government critics, including cartoonist
and political activist Zunar.
FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
Human rights activists and opposition
parliamentarians were tried for participating
in peaceful protests. 3 In October, protesters
travelling the country in a convoy to advocate
for electoral reform and raise awareness of
the Bersih 5 demonstration were subjected to
physical attacks and intimidation, as well as
death threats against their leaders. 4
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Preventive detention laws continued to be
used to detain people alleged to have
committed security crimes. Wording in the
Prevention of Terrorism Act was overly broad
and open to abuse; it failed to define what is
meant by those “engaged in the commission
or support of terrorist acts”. It allowed the
authorities to arrest individuals without
providing grounds for detention, for up to 60
days without charge or trial. The Security
Offences Measures Act (SOSMA) allowed for
detention for up to 28 days without charge or
trial.
242
In January and February, the human rights
NGO Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM)
reported that at least 13 people were tortured
or otherwise ill-treated while detained under
SOSMA, including being beaten and stepped
on, and being forced to strip and perform
sexual acts in the presence of the authorities.
Investigations were ongoing by the National
Human Rights Commission at the end of the
year.
The National Security Council Act, which
came into force in August, provided the
executive with extensive powers including
arrest, search and seizure without warrant,
curfews, and authority to circumvent
accountability measures such as inquests
into deaths in security areas. 5
In November, the chairperson of Bersih,
Maria Chin Abdullah, was arrested in
connection with the organization of the
Bersih demonstration (see above). She was
held under SOSMA for attempting to carry
out activities detrimental to parliamentary
democracy. She was placed in solitary
confinement for 11 days and held without
charge or access to a judge in deplorable
conditions, in an unknown location.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Impunity for deaths in custody and excessive
use of force persisted. In April, the
Enforcement Agency Integrity Commission
found that police officers in charge of
interrogating N. Dharmendran, who died in
police custody in 2013, were responsible for
his death by physical force and that the
police later fabricated evidence to cover up
his treatment during interrogation. Despite
this, in June, the Kuala Lumpur Criminal
High Court acquitted the four policemen
charged with his murder. His widow filed a
civil suit against the police and government. 6
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In May 2015, amid intense international
pressure, Malaysia agreed to accept 1,100
people stranded off its coastline. The group,
including over 400 Rohingya, faced
prolonged detention for over a year in harsh
conditions. In June, the majority of the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Rohingya were released and some were
resettled. 7 Immigration detention centres in
Malaysia were overcrowded and conditions
remained harsh.
A lack of transparency by the authorities
regarding investigations into mass graves
found on the Thai-Malaysian border in 2015,
as well as identification of the remains, led to
renewed calls on the authorities to take
adequate action to investigate the deaths.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty continued to be retained
as the mandatory punishment for offences
including drug trafficking, murder and
discharge of firearms with intent to kill or
harm in certain circumstances. Reforms to
the death penalty announced by the
government in 2015 had not yet materialized.
While executions and new death sentences
continued to be recorded, no established
procedure remained for notification to
families of scheduled executions. 8
1. Malaysia: Drop investigations against members of the Malaysia Bar
(ASA 28/3758/2016)
2. Malaysia: Prison sentence overturned, fine upheld (ASA
28/4051/2016)
3. Malaysia: End crackdown on Bersih Activists (News story, 18
November)
4. Malaysia: Death threats against Bersih organizers (ASA
28/5014/2016)
5. Malaysia: National Security Council Act gives authorities unchecked
and abusive powers (News story, 1 August)
6. Malaysia: Police must be held accountable for death in custody
(News story, 29 June)
7. Malaysia: One year on, no justice for the "boat crisis" survivors (News
story, 28 May)
8. Malaysia: Stop execution of prisoners due to be hanged (News story,
23 March)
MALDIVES
Republic of Maldives
Head of state and government: Abdulla Yameen Abdul
Gayoom
The government intensified its crackdown
on the rights to freedom of expression and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
of peaceful assembly. Authorities used new
laws and criminal cases to silence political
opponents, as well as human rights
defenders, journalists and civil society. Lack
of independence of the judiciary remained a
concern. The government took steps to
reintroduce executions after more than 60
years.
BACKGROUND
The ruling coalition enacted new legislation to
curtail peaceful protests and expression. An
opposition coalition, the Maldives United
Opposition, was set up. It was headed by
former Vice-President Mohamed Jameel and
advised by former President Mohamed
Nasheed who was granted political asylum in
the UK. There were growing signs of splits in
the ruling coalition between factions loyal to
the current President and those loyal to
former President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.
UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities increasingly ignored
constitutional safeguards on the right to a fair
trial, as evidenced by a string of criminal
cases against political opponents. On 10
June, former Vice-President Adeeb received
a 15-year jail sentence; he was convicted in
connection with a plot to assassinate the
President, amid serious concerns about the
fairness of his trial. In February, Sheikh Imran
Abdulla leader of the Adhaalath Party, was
sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment for
terrorism after a trial which was widely
criticized as unfair and politically motivated.
The Supreme Court upheld lengthy jail
sentences for former President Nasheed and
former Defence Minister Mohamed Nazim;
both had been sentenced in trials criticized
as grossly unfair.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The judicial system continued to be deeply
politicized. In July, a civil court threatened to
hold the Attorney General in contempt after
his office said it would appeal against a
judgment that barred former staff of Haveeru
newspaper from working for any other media
organization for two years. The government
243failed to strengthen the Judicial Services
Commission to ensure impartiality.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
A new defamation law criminalizing
“defamatory” speech, remarks and other
actions was passed by Parliament and
ratified by the President in August. The law is
vaguely worded and broad in its application,
giving the authorities wide discretion to target
and silence peaceful critics. 1
Free and independent media faced
harassment in the form of lawsuits and bans.
News outlets Haveeru, DhiTV, AdduLIVE and
Channel News Maldives were on occasion
blocked or forced to shut down. Four
journalists from the pro-opposition Raajje TV
were charged with obstructing law
enforcement officers after covering a protest;
their sentences were expected in early 2017.
Social media activist “Lucas” Jaleel was
arrested for “inciting hatred” in July after he
alleged excessive use of force by police in a
series of tweets.
In April, police confirmed that reporter
Ahmed Rilwan had been abducted outside
his home in 2014, having previously denied
there was evidence of an abduction. In May,
the government denied involvement in his
disappearance to the UN Working Group on
Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances.
In September, police raided the premises
of the newspaper Maldives Independent, on
the basis that it was suspected of
involvement in a coup plot. The raid took
place hours after the premiere of an Al
Jazeera documentary alleging large-scale
corruption by the President and senior
ministers, in which the newspaper’s editor
was interviewed.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Arbitrary restrictions on peaceful protesters
and human rights defenders continued. In
February, police banned an anti-corruption
rally in the capital, Malé. In April, 16
journalists were arrested after staging a
peaceful protest against the defamation law
outside the President’s office, 2 and in August
journalists were stopped from protesting
244
against the same law. In July, the Maldives
United Opposition was refused permission by
the government to hold a rally. A law was
enacted in August requiring written
permission from the police to hold a protest
in Malé.
CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
PUNISHMENT
Courts continued to sentence people, the
vast majority of them women, to flogging.
This was most commonly imposed for
“fornication”. Despite flogging constituting
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
punishment, the government continued to
insist that it would not remove the
punishment from Maldivian law.
DEATH PENALTY
Senior officials repeatedly pledged to resume
executions and end a moratorium on the use
of the death penalty that has been in effect
for more than 60 years. The government
declared that it would carry out executions
within 30 days of the Supreme Court
upholding death sentences and changed the
method of execution from lethal injection to
death by hanging. Death sentences against
three people were upheld by the Supreme
Court in June and July, despite well-
documented fair trial concerns in at least one
case. 3 No executions took place, as
negotiations with the victims’ families over
possible pardons under Islamic law were
ongoing. Of the 17 prisoners on death row, at
least five were sentenced to death for crimes
committed when they were below 18 years of
age.
1. Maldives: Proposed defamation law is an attack on freedom of
expression (ASA 29/4573/2016)
2. Maldives: Arrest of 16 journalists threatens freedom of the press (ASA
33/3773/2016)
3. Maldives: Halt plans to carry out first execution in more than six
decades (ASA 29/4364/2016)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17MALI
Internal armed conflict and instability
increased. Armed groups committed
abuses, including killing peacekeepers.
Security forces and UN peacekeepers used
excessive and lethal force, including against
protesters. had been captured and held by the same
group for nine days in 2012. In December,
Sophie Petronin, a French national working
for a humanitarian organization, was
kidnapped in Gao by AQIM.
In mid-May, the armed group Ansar
Eddine killed five Chadian peacekeepers and
wounded three in an ambush about 15km
north of Aguelhok in the eastern Kidal region.
Later that month, an attack on a MINUSMA
camp in the northeastern city of Gao, claimed
by AQIM, killed one Chinese peacekeeper
and injured others.
BACKGROUND EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Instability spread from the north to the centre
of the country, with a growing number of
armed groups carrying out attacks. In July,
for example, armed groups killed 17 soldiers
and wounded 35 others during an attack on
an army base in central Mali. Armed groups
retained control of the northern town of Kidal.
The proliferation of armed groups hampered
implementation of the 2015 Algiers peace
agreement. In July, following several attacks,
including in the north and the capital,
Bamako, the state of emergency was
extended until March 2017.
In June, the UN Security Council extended
the mandate of the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) to June 2017. More than
10,000 peacekeepers were stationed in the
country.
More than 135,000 Malians remained as
refugees in neighbouring countries because
of the conflict. Security forces and UN peacekeepers used
excessive force and were accused of
extrajudicial executions. The UN reported a
total of 24 instances of killings, summary
executions and enforced disappearances in
both March and May. In May, it reported that
of 103 people arrested by Malian and
international forces for terrorism-related
charges so far in 2016, three had been
summarily executed and 12 had been
tortured by Malian forces.
In April, two demonstrators were shot dead
and four others were wounded at Kidal
Airport during a protest against arrests by
international forces. MINUSMA established
an inquiry.
In July, Malian forces fired live ammunition
during a march in Gao organized by the Civil
Resistance Movement, killing Mahamane
Housseini, Seydou Douka Maiga and
Abdoulaye Idrissa, and wounding more than
40 others.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS IMPUNITY
Attacks by armed groups against MINUSMA
increased sharply. More than 62 attacks were
committed during the year, killing 25
peacekeepers and six civilian contractors
working for the UN. Landmines used by
armed groups killed and maimed civilians,
peacekeepers and members of the security
forces.
In January, Beatrice Stockly, a Swiss
missionary, was abducted in Timbuktu by al-
Qa’ida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM). She Despite some progress, measures taken to
ensure truth, justice and reparation for
victims of the conflict were limited. The UN
Independent Expert on Mali highlighted the
lack of progress, particularly regarding
meaningful access to justice for women who
had experienced violence. Insecurity and
lack of logistical support for magistrates were
cited as among the major impediments.
In May, 12 people charged with terrorism-
related offences were sentenced to prison
Republic of Mali
Head of state: Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta
Head of government: Modibo Keïta
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
245terms. Some of them had been released
under the peace agreement.
In November, the trial began of General
Haya Amadou Sanogo on charges linked to
the abduction and murder in 2012 of soldiers
accused of supporting the ousted President,
Amadou Toumani Touré. 1
The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission, established in 2014 to
investigate serious human rights violations
between 1960 and 2013, was still not
operational at the end of 2016.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
In September, the International Criminal
Court sentenced Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi to
nine years in prison for directing attacks
against religious buildings and historic
monuments. A member of Ansar Eddine, he
was charged for his role in destroying nine
mausoleums and a mosque in the northern
town of Timbuktu in 2012. He pleaded guilty.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In August, Mohamed Youssouf Bathily
(known as Rath Bath), a journalist working
for Maliba FM radio, was arrested and
charged with undermining decency and
demotivating the army. He had called for the
army’s Chief of Staff to resign and criticized
the army. He was released after two days
under judicial supervision; his radio
programme was banned.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
According to the UN, 296 out of 2,380
schools were closed in the regions of Gao,
Kidal, Ségou and Timbuktu because of
insecurity, with no alternatives provided. The
CEDAW Committee noted the poor quality of
education owing to the high pupil-teacher
ratio and the lack of textbooks and qualified
teachers. The Committee also noted rural-
urban disparities in enrolment. Seven armed
groups continued to occupy schools.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
More than 33,000 Malians remained
internally displaced because of the conflict,
246
and some 3 million people faced food
insecurity, including more than 423,000 at
severe levels. Hijackings by armed groups in
Gao and Ménaka regions hampered access
to humanitarian assistance, including health
care. In June, a warehouse in Kidal stocked
with food for more than 10,000 people was
looted.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In July, the CEDAW Committee voiced
concern about the low level of representation
of women on the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission and at decision-
making levels following the peace agreement.
It also expressed concern at the extremely
low completion rate for girls in secondary
education owing to factors including early
and child marriage, early pregnancy, indirect
school costs, child labour and a preference
for sending boys to school. The Committee
urged Mali to reform legislation to eliminate
discrimination against women, and to finalize
the bill to prohibit female genital mutilation.
1. Mali: Trial of former junta leader must bring justice for abductions,
torture and murder (News story, 28 November)
MALTA
Republic of Malta
Head of state : Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca
Head of government: Joseph Muscat
Implementation of a new reception regime
for asylum-seekers and migrants started,
which moved away from automatic and
mandatory detention of people entering
Malta irregularly. However, there were
concerns that safeguards against arbitrary
and unlawful detention remained
insufficient. Abortion remained prohibited
in all circumstances.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January and February, UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, and national NGOs
welcomed elements of the new legal and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17policy framework relating to the reception of
asylum-seekers and migrants in Malta. It had
been approved at the end of 2015 and
introduced through amendments to the
Immigration and the Refugee Acts,
regulations and a new policy document of the
Ministry for Home Affairs and National
Security.
The new framework ended the problematic
regime of long-term automatic and
mandatory detention of asylum-seekers and
migrants irregularly entering Malta. However,
a period of detention upon arrival was
maintained at the newly created Initial
Reception Centres of around 70 hours, where
asylum-seekers and migrants are medically
screened, identified and assessed for release
or further detention. While such initial
detention should ordinarily be for no more
than seven days, it could be longer for
health-related concerns. The new framework
also introduced legal grounds for detention,
free legal assistance, the possibility to
challenge detention orders and an automatic
review of detention orders.
Concerns remained as to the interpretation
of the legal grounds for detention, a lack of
clarity on when alternatives to detention
might apply, and the lack of safeguards to
ensure the proportionate use of detention. In
particular, UNHCR noted that some of the
new guidelines for immigration authorities
were not fully consistent with international
law and standards, and could lead to
arbitrary detention.
There were no irregular boat arrivals of
refugees and migrants directly from North
Africa, as most people were rescued at sea
and disembarked in Italy. However, 29 people
in need of urgent medical assistance during
their rescue on the high seas were taken to
Malta. The Armed Forces of Malta continued
to participate in the rescue of refugees and
migrants crossing the central Mediterranean
on overcrowded and unseaworthy vessels, as
part of Frontex Operation Triton and of
EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia. By the
end of November over 1,600 people had
reached Malta by plane or ferry to seek
asylum. Over a third were Libyans.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Those accepted under the EU relocation
programme (80 people by the end of
November) were held for medical screening
for around 70 hours in the newly created
Initial Reception Centres, although this was
criticized by UNHCR.
In January, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) found Malta in breach of
Article 5, paragraph 4 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, on the right to
have lawfulness of detention assessed
speedily by a court. The applicants were two
Somali women who had been detained from
August 2012 to August 2013, because of
their irregular entry into Malta under the
previous reception regime, and who had no
adequate remedy to challenge the lawfulness
of their detention.
In June, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention released a report on
Malta, following a visit to the country the
previous year. The Working Group
acknowledged the legislative reform to the
automatic nature of detention. It also noted
that programmes for the integration of
migrants, asylum-seekers and refugees into
Maltese society remained inadequate.
In November, the Ministry for Home Affairs
and National Security announced a review of
Temporary Humanitarian Protection – New
(THPN) certificates, which are held by people
whose asylum requests have failed. NGOs
expressed concern that the decision could
hamper the ability of those concerned to
access basic services, including health and
education. UNHCR recommended caution in
implementing repatriations as a result of the
review, as it was aware of cases of people
who should have been granted international
protection but were instead granted THPN.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Abortion remained prohibited in all
circumstances, with women being denied
access to it even when their life was at risk.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In January, the ECtHR found Malta in breach
of Article 6 of the European Convention on
247Human Rights, which among other things,
guarantees access to a lawyer at the initial
stages of police interrogation. A convicted
offender had complained that he had been
denied legal assistance during questioning in
police custody at the pre-trial stage.
MAURITANIA
Islamic Republic of Mauritania
Head of state: Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz
Head of government: Yahya Ould Hademine
Human rights defenders and opponents of
the government faced politically motivated
prosecutions, with anti-slavery organizations
particularly persecuted. The rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly were restricted. Torture
and other ill-treatment in custody were
common. Groups making up two thirds of
the population faced systematic
discrimination, and extreme poverty was
widespread. The practice of slavery
continued.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Laws – including those covering public
disorder, resisting arrest and belonging to an
unauthorized organization – were used in
politically motivated prosecutions against
human rights defenders and government
opponents, particularly anti-slavery activists.
In May, the Supreme Court ordered the
release of two anti-slavery activists, Biram
Ould Dah Abeid and Brahim Bilal, after
reducing their prison sentences. The two
prisoners of conscience, members of
Initiative for the Resurgence of the
Abolitionist Movement (IRA), were arrested in
November 2014 after taking part in a
peaceful protest. They had been sentenced
to two years’ imprisonment on charges of
belonging to an unrecognized organization,
taking part in an unauthorized assembly,
failing to comply with police orders and
resisting arrest. Another member of the IRA
who received the same sentence, Djiby Sow,
248
was released on medical grounds in June
2015.
In June and July, 13 other members of the
IRA were arrested after a protest against
forced eviction by communities in the slum
area of Bouamatou, in the capital
Nouakchott. Although none of the IRA
members had attended the protest, in August
they were convicted on charges including
rebellion and use of violence. The court
refused to examine allegations of torture
made by the accused. 1 In October a group of
UN experts expressed serious concern that
these activists had been targeted by the
government for their anti-slavery advocacy,
stating that the government was hostile to
civil society groups that criticized its policies,
especially groups such as the IRA, whose
members are drawn from the Haratine
minority and advocate for an end to slavery.
In November, the Appeals Court of
Nouadhibou acquitted three of the 13 IRA
members and reduced the sentences of
seven others who were released the same
month. Three remaining IRA members were
sentenced to six months and three years in
prison.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The space for the exercise of the rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly shrank as journalists,
human rights defenders and government
critics were arrested and prosecuted by a
politicized judiciary. 2
In April, the Appeals Court in Nouakchott
upheld the death sentence of Mohamed
Mkhaïtir for apostasy in the first case of its
kind in Mauritania. Mohamed Mkhaïtir was
originally sentenced to death in December
2014 in Nouadhibou after a year in pre-trial
detention for writing a blog critical of those
who use Islam to foster discrimination against
Moulamines (blacksmiths) and the
descendants of slaves and griots. The
Appeals Court referred the case to the
Supreme Court.
In July, Cheikh Baye, manager of the
Meyadine news website, was sentenced to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17three years’ imprisonment for using violence
against a public official. He had accused a
government spokesperson of lying and threw
his shoe at him during a press briefing. Five
people who criticized the verdict were also
convicted of the same charges in August.
Three were sentenced to two years’
imprisonment and two received suspended
sentences.
The authorities continued to bar the legal
registration of several NGOs and human
rights organizations. For example, the
Association des Veuves de la Mauritanie, an
organization calling for the truth about
summary executions and disappearances in
the 1990s, has been waiting for recognition
since 1993; it renewed its request in 2010.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Following a visit in February, the UN Special
Rapporteur on torture welcomed legislative
developments, including the introduction of a
new law against torture, and the
establishment of a National Preventive
Mechanism (NPM). He stressed that the
judiciary should step up efforts to implement
these safeguards and highlighted the lack of
investigations into allegations of torture. He
also drew attention to the use of unofficial
detention facilities and the denial of access to
a lawyer for up to 45 days in terrorism-related
cases.
Prisoners, male and female, reported in
mid-2016 that they had been tortured and
otherwise ill-treated in police custody and by
prison guards. One prisoner charged with a
terrorism-related offence said that following
his arrest in March, he was beaten to make
him “confess” with his hands and feet tied
together behind his back.
The IRA members arrested in June and
July were held separately in undisclosed
places of detention and denied access to
their families and lawyers. They were
interrogated at night, deprived of sleep and
denied access to toilets. At least four had
their feet and hands bound in painful
positions for hours and were suspended by
ropes from the ceiling. Others were stripped,
insulted and threatened with death. Despite
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
the new NPM programme to monitor places
of detention, an NPM member was denied
access to IRA members who were being held
in incommunicado detention.
DISCRIMINATION – HARATINES AND
AFRO-MAURITANIANS
The UN Special Rapporteur on extreme
poverty and human rights, who visited
Mauritania in April, highlighted a systematic
absence of Haratines and Afro-Mauritanians
from almost all positions of power and their
exclusion from many aspects of economic
and social life, including their inability to
obtain a national identity card. The two
groups make up two thirds of the population.
He stressed that, although economic, social
and cultural rights are mentioned in the
preamble of the Constitution, there were no
provisions dealing with them. He pointed out
that in some rural areas only 10% of children
attended secondary school and that the
maternal mortality rate remained one of the
highest in the world. In 2015, according to
the World Bank, 602 mothers died for every
100,000 live births.
SLAVERY
Although slavery was abolished officially in
1981 and is recognized as a crime in
domestic law, human rights organizations
including SOS Esclaves and IRA regularly
criticized the continuation of this practice. 3
In May, the Special Tribunal against
Slavery opened in Nema, and in the same
month two former slave owners were handed
a one-year prison sentence and a four-year
suspended sentence and ordered to pay
compensation to two women victims. Yet in
the same month, in the same town, President
Abdel Aziz denied that slavery existed and
called on the Haratines, the former slave
population, to have fewer children in order to
address the legacy of slavery and poverty.
1. Mauritania: Drop all charges and release anti-slavery activists (News
story, 1 August)
2. Mauritania: New law compromises right to freedom of association
(News story, 2 June)
2493. Amnesty International calls for an end to slavery and torture and ill-
treatment in Mauritania (AFR 38/3691/2016)
MEXICO
United Mexican States
Head of state and government: Enrique Peña Nieto
Ten years since the start of the so-called
“war on drugs and organized crime”, the
use of military personnel in public security
operations continued and violence
throughout the country remained
widespread. There continued to be reports
of torture and other ill-treatment, enforced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions
and arbitrary detentions. Impunity persisted
for human rights violations and crimes
under international law. Mexico received its
highest-ever number of asylum claims,
mostly from people fleeing violence in El
Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala. Human
rights defenders and independent observers
were subjected to intense smear
campaigns; journalists continued to be
killed and threatened for their work.
Violence against women remained a major
concern and “gender alerts” were issued in
the states of Jalisco and Michoacán.
Congress rejected one of the two bills
presented to allow same-sex couples to
marry and adopt children.
BACKGROUND
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party
lost a number of governorships in various
states in June elections. A prolonged social
conflict between the government and
teachers' unions led to mass protests and
blockaded highways throughout the country,
with unions calling for the government to
revoke its 2013 educational reform.
Mexico completed its transition from a
written, inquisitorial criminal justice system to
one based on oral trials, after an eight-year
preparatory period came to a close. Many
challenges of the prior system remained –
including a failure to respect the presumption
250
of innocence – despite the implementation of
the reform.
A 10-point security plan announced by
President Peña Nieto in November 2014 had
yet to be fully implemented, with promises to
pass laws against torture and enforced
disappearances as well as disappearances by
non-state actors yet to be fulfilled. A package
of anti-corruption laws was passed by
Congress. The new legislation was widely
criticized as falling short of earlier drafts.
Official records noted that the number of
soldiers and marines employed in security
operations throughout the country increased.
In October the Minister of Defence admitted
that the war on drugs had taken its toll on the
exhausted armed forces and called for
further legal clarity regarding their role in
public security tasks. Legislators vowed to
discuss reforms regarding the armed forces
in security operations.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
There was a marked increase in violence,
with 36,056 homicides registered by the
authorities up until the end of November –
the highest number since the start of
President Peña Nieto’s term in 2012 –
compared to 33,017 in 2015.
In response to widespread protests from
teachers’ movements, the authorities carried
out a number of police operations, some of
which resulted in civilians being killed and
injured. Several leaders of the movements
were arrested and detained in federal
prisons. Many of them were subsequently
released pending further investigation.
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Perpetrators of extrajudicial executions
continued to enjoy impunity; the crimes were
not properly investigated. The armed forces
continued to contribute to investigations in
cases involving military personnel, contrary to
the 2014 reform of the Code of Military
Justice. For the third consecutive year, the
authorities failed to publish the number of
people killed or wounded in clashes with the
police and military forces.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Dozens of mass graves were uncovered
throughout the country, often on the initiative
of family groups rather than authorities or
official forensic experts. Local authorities
illegally disposed of over 100 unidentified
bodies in at least one grave in the
municipality of Tetelcingo, Morelos state. The
perpetrators of the killings remained
unidentified.
On 19 June, at least eight people were
killed and dozens injured in Nochixtlán town,
Oaxaca state, during a police operation
following a roadblock as part of a
demonstration against the government’s
education reform. Footage published by
media outlets contradicted the authorities’
original assertion that the policemen were
unarmed.
In August, the National Human Rights
Commission found that federal police
members had tortured at least two people in
the municipality of Tanhuato, Michoacán
state, in May 2015 as part of a security
operation; that at least 22 of the 43 people
killed during the operation were victims of
arbitrary execution; and that the police had
tampered with evidence including by planting
firearms on the victims.
Investigations into the killings by soldiers of
22 people in 2014 in Tlatlaya, Mexico state,
had yet to produce concrete results. The
authorities failed to take responsibility for the
order “to take down criminals” (meant as “to
kill” in this context) that was the basis for
military operations in the area in 2014, or to
investigate any officers with command
responsibility.
No one was known to have been
prosecuted for the killings in 2015 of 16
people by federal police officers and other
security forces in Apatzingán, Michoacán
state; the authorities failed to adequately
investigate the killings or to look into the
responsibility of those in command.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Impunity for torture and other ill-treatment
remained almost absolute, with numerous
reports of beatings, near asphyxiation with
plastic bags, electric shocks, rape and other
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
sexual assault taking place during police and
military operations. Sexual violence used as a
form of torture was commonplace during
arrests of women. 1 For the first time in two
years, the Federal Attorney General's Office
announced charges of torture against five
federal officials in April, in response to a
leaked video showing police officers and
soldiers torturing a woman. Also in April, in a
rare case a federal judge sentenced an army
general to 52 years’ imprisonment for having
ordered an operation which involved torture
and homicide as well as destruction of a body
in Chihuahua state in 2008.
In April, the Senate approved a bill for a
General Law on Torture which complied with
international standards. The bill was
amended and remained pending a general
vote in the Chamber of Deputies at the end of
the year.
The Special Unit on Torture of the Federal
Attorney General’s Office reported 4,715
torture investigation files under revision at
federal level.
As in previous years, the special medical
examination procedure of the Federal
Attorney General’s Office for cases of alleged
torture was not applied in most cases, with a
backlog of over 3,000 requests on file. In
many cases, investigations into torture and
other ill-treatment failed to advance without
an official examination.
In September, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)
referred the case of 11 women who were
subjected to sexual violence as a form of
torture in San Salvador Atenco in 2006 to the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights, given
Mexico’s failure to fulfil the Commission's
recommendations on the case.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
A record number of asylum claims were
registered, with 6,898 lodged as of October –
93% of whom were nationals of El Salvador,
Honduras and Guatemala. Refugee status
was granted to 2,162 people, despite
estimates that more than 400,000 irregular
migrants crossed Mexico's southern border
each year, half of whom could qualify for
251asylum status, according to international
organizations and academics. In the majority
of cases, the authorities failed to adequately
inform migrants of their right to seek asylum
in Mexico.
In August, a constitutional reform to
recognize the right to asylum entered into
force.
The implementation of the Southern
Border Plan again led to a surge in security
operations on the Mexican border with
Guatemala and Belize, with frequent reports
of extortions, mass deportations, kidnappings
and other human rights abuses against
migrants. As of November, 174,526 irregular
migrants had been apprehended and
detained, and 136,420 returned to their
country. Of those deported, 97% were from
Central America. Data from the US Congress
in February showed that the US government
plans to allocate US$75 million to “security
and migration enforcement” on Mexico’s
southern border, through the Mérida
Initiative.
The Federal Attorney General's Office
established a new Unit for the Investigation of
Crimes against Migrants. Civil society
organizations participated in the design of a
Mexican Mechanism for Foreign Support in
Search and Investigation to co-ordinate
Mexican and Central American authorities’
efforts to ensure justice for migrant victims of
disappearances by non-state actors and
other crimes in Mexico.
In September, President Peña Nieto
announced a plan on refugees at a UN
summit and officially acknowledged the
refugee crisis in Mexico and Central America.
The plan promised to increase funding of
Mexico's refugee agency by 80%, to ensure
that no child migrant under 11 years of age
be detained, and to strengthen the inclusion
and integration of refugees in the country. In
May, a special report by the National Human
Rights Commission identified at least 35,433
victims of internal displacement in Mexico,
despite the fact that credible estimates based
on official data were at least four times
higher. In October, the Commission published
a report highlighting the poor living conditions
252
in migration detention centres, especially for
unaccompanied children.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Enforced disappearances with the
involvement of the state and disappearances
committed by non-state actors continued to
be widespread and those responsible
continued to enjoy almost absolute impunity.
The investigations into the cases of missing
people continued to be flawed and unduly
delayed. The authorities generally failed to
immediately search for victims.
By the end of the year, 29,917 people
(22,414 men and 7,503 women) were
reported as missing by the government. The
figures by the National Register of Missing
and Disappeared Persons did not include
federal cases that occurred prior to 2014 nor
cases classified as other criminal offences
such as hostage-taking or human trafficking.
Enforced disappearances and
disappearances by non-state actors inflicted
serious harm on victims’ relatives, which
constituted a form of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment. Available data suggested that a
majority of victims were men; women made
up the majority of relatives seeking truth,
justice and reparations. Some relatives of
disappeared people who were searching for
their family members received death threats.
The Senate held public hearings with
relatives of disappeared people on the
General Law on Disappearances that had
been presented to Congress by President
Peña Nieto in December 2015. The bill
remained before Congress.
In March, criminal charges were presented
against five marines for the enforced
disappearance of Armando Humberto del
Bosque Villarreal, who had been found dead
weeks after his arbitrary arrest in 2013 in
Nuevo León state.
In April, the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts (GIEI) appointed by the
IACHR published its second report on the 43
students from a teacher training college in
Ayotzinapa, Guerrero state, who were victims
of enforced disappearance in September
Amnesty International Report 2016/172014. The GIEI confirmed that the
authorities’ assertion that the students had
been killed and burned in a local rubbish
dump was scientifically impossible. The GIEI
also revealed that in October 2014, officials
had irregularly visited a scene later linked to
the crime and handled important evidence
without proper permission or documentation.
A man held in custody in relation to the case
was forced by the authorities to participate in
the visit without his lawyer present or any
oversight from a judge. The visit took place a
day before the government discovered a
small piece of bone in the same place, later
identified as belonging to student Alexander
Mora Venancio. The leading official involved
in these investigations resigned from his post
within the Federal Attorney General’s Office,
even though an investigation into his actions
was ongoing. He was immediately appointed
by President Peña Nieto to another senior
federal position. In November, the IACHR
presented its work plan for a follow-up
mechanism on the Ayotzinapa case after the
GIEI recommendations and the 2014
precautionary measure issued by the IAHCR
ordering Mexico to determine the status and
whereabouts of the 43 missing students.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
AND JOURNALISTS
Human rights defenders and journalists
continued to be threatened, harassed,
intimidated, attacked or killed. At least 11
journalists were killed during the year. The
federal Mechanism for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists left
human rights defenders and journalists
inadequately protected. In February,
international human rights organizations
denounced the smear campaign against the
GIEI and local NGOs involved in the
Ayotzinapa case – a campaign that appeared
to be tolerated by the authorities. The
number of requests for protection under the
Mechanism remained steady in relation to
the previous year.
In July, Humberto Moreira Valdés, former
governor of the state of Coahuila and former
president of the Institutional Revolutionary
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Party, sued prominent journalist Sergio
Aguayo for US$ 550,000 in a civil lawsuit for
alleged moral damage to his reputation due
to an opinion piece published by Sergio
Aguayo. The excessive amount demanded
could constitute a form of punishment and
intimidation, potentially affecting freedom of
expression in public debate.
In August, prisoner of conscience and
community environmental defender Ildefonso
Zamora was released after nine months’
imprisonment on fabricated charges.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The Supreme Court continued to analyze a
legal challenge to Mexico City’s 2014 Law on
Mobility. It ruled in August that the law
should not be interpreted as imposing a prior
authorization regime for demonstrations, but
only as a rule allowing people to notify
authorities in advance of any planned
demonstration. The Court considered that the
lack of provisions on spontaneous
demonstrations did not mean that such acts
were forbidden in any way. Finally, it voted in
favour of a rule banning protests in the city’s
main avenues.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In May, President Peña Nieto presented two
draft bills to Congress to reform the
Constitution and the Federal Civil Code. The
proposed constitutional reform to expressly
guarantee the right to marry without
discrimination was rejected by Congress
in November.
The second proposed reform to the Civil
Code would prohibit discrimination on
grounds of sexual orientation and gender
identity in allowing couples to marry and
people to adopt children; the reform also
included the right of transgender people to
have their gender identity recognized by
Mexico. The bill had yet to be discussed in
Congress.
In September, Supreme Court
jurisprudence upholding same-sex couples’
rights to marry and adopt children without
being discriminated against on the basis of
253sexual orientation and gender identity
became binding on all judges in the country.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Violence against women and girls remained
endemic. In April, dozens of thousands of
people demonstrated around the country,
demanding an end to violence against
women, including sexual harassment. The
“Gender Alert” mechanism was activated in
the states of Jalisco and Michoacán after it
had already been activated in the states of
Morelos and Mexico in the previous year. A
lack of accurate, up-to-date and
disaggregated data about gender-based
violence constituted a major obstacle to
tackling the problem.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Due to last-minute information from the
Ministry of Economy regarding the
cancellation of two mining concessions by
companies in the community of San Miguel
Progreso, Guerrero state, the Supreme Court
declined to consider the effect that the
Mining Law of 1991 had on Indigenous
Peoples’ rights. A legal framework on
Indigenous Peoples’ right to free, prior and
informed consent remained largely absent
from the legislative debate, despite the fact
that a bill had been discussed in public
forums and the National Human Rights
Commission issued a recommendation in
October to the Congress that it legislate on
this matter. In September, the Indigenous
municipality of Guevea de Humboldt, Oaxaca
state, allowed women in the community to
exercise their right to vote for the first time in
local elections.
1. Surviving death: Police and military torture of women in Mexico
(AMR 41/4237/2016)
MOLDOVA
Republic of Moldova
Head of state: Igor Dodon (replaced Nicolae Timofti in
December)
Head of government: Pavel Filip (replaced Gheorghe
Brega in January)
Police occasionally used unnecessary or
excessive force during street protests. A
number of high-profile cases of criminal
prosecution prompted concern about unfair
trials, including selective justice. The media
remained largely free albeit less pluralistic
than in previous years. No progress was
made to address structural causes of
impunity for torture and other ill-treatment.
Overcrowding and poor conditions prevailed
in some penitentiary institutions. Laws
allowed forced detention and non-
consensual administration of treatment to
people with disabilities in psychiatric
institutions.
BACKGROUND
A sense of impotence in the face of
corruption and deteriorating living standards
continued to define the political climate,
prompting popular discontent and sporadic
protests. Rumours of political meddling by a
prominent oligarch, following the sudden
arrest of former Prime Minister Vladimir Filat
in October 2015, prompted some of the large
street protests. Relative political stability was
achieved in January, through opaque
backstage party deals, leading to the
appointment of the new Prime Minister. The
Constitutional Court ruled on 3 March that
the country’s President should be elected by
direct popular vote, leading to the first direct
presidential election since 1996, on 30
October (with a second round on 13
November).
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Demonstrations in the capital Chişinău and
elsewhere remained peaceful, except for
some minor clashes between protesters and
police. The police response, although
254
Amnesty International Report 2016/17generally restrained, occasionally involved
unnecessary or excessive use of force,
including tear gas and batons.
The trial continued of the seven “Petrenco
group” protesters (for trying to force their way
into the Prosecutor’s Office during a
demonstration on 6 September 2015), with
six of them spending over six months in
detention and all charged with “attempting to
organize mass disturbances”. Following
much criticism in Moldova and
internationally, the six detained defendants
were placed under house arrest on 22
February and released one month later under
travel restrictions.
UNFAIR TRIALS
The case against the “Petrenco group” and a
number of other criminal prosecutions
prompted concerns about political bias.
Following eight months of detention, on 27
June Vladimir Filat was found guilty of
“passive corruption” and “benefiting from
[his] influence” in relation to fraud in 2014
that cost the National Bank over a third of its
reserves, and sentenced to nine years’
imprisonment. His closed trial left more
questions than answers, including over the
lack of investigation against any other
politicians. His defence appealed against the
verdict and claimed that there were
procedural violations and lack of equality of
arms between the parties. The latter was
officially denied, but because of the closed
proceedings, neither claim could be
independently verified. During the hearing,
Vladimir Filat reportedly went on hunger
strike for 20 days and once lost
consciousness in the courtroom.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION – MEDIA
While media freedom was generally
respected, concerns over independence
persisted in light of the concentration of
ownership in the hands of a few individuals.
At least two prominent critical journalists
complained of anonymous threats. In August,
a bullet was fired into the window of
Constantin Cheianu’s daughter’s flat. The
journalist had received text messages
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
warning that he “will be stopped” if he
carried on writing about the oligarchic
system. TV presenter Natalia Morari reported
receiving similar warnings from a source
which she described as credible. Both
journalists filed official complaints with
the authorities.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
No progress was made to address structural
causes of impunity for torture and other ill-
treatment, while the prosecution of alleged
perpetrators remained extremely rare.
Between January and June, 331 people
complained to the Prosecutor’s Office about
torture and other ill-treatment. Out of 19
torture-related cases in which courts gave
decisions, 15 resulted in convictions but only
two out of the 18 defendants convicted
received custodial sentences.
Vladimir Filat’s family and lawyer
repeatedly alleged that he was ill-treated,
including by being placed in solitary
confinement where they said conditions
amounted to torture. This once again shone a
light on Penitentiary Institution no. 13 in
Chişinău, which had been criticized by
independent monitors in previous years. All
requests for an independent visit to Filat,
including by Amnesty International, were
refused, even after his conviction. However,
Amnesty International visited the institution
and confirmed that while conditions had
visibly improved in some cells (improvements
usually sponsored by inmates’ families),
overcrowding and poor sanitary and hygiene
conditions prevailed in others.
In June, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture reported on its
September 2015 visit to Moldova. It noted
progress since 2011, but there were still
concerns about excessive force by police
during arrest, ill-treatment of detainees
during “preliminary questioning”, and
overcrowding of “disturbing proportions” in
some prisons.
255LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
Changes to the Criminal Procedure Code
came into force on 26 May, introducing
stronger safeguards against arbitrary use of
pre-trial detention and requiring non-
custodial alternatives wherever possible.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
The biggest-ever Pride march took place on
22 May in Chişinău, involving around 300
participants. Some counter-demonstrators
attempted to assault LGBTI rights activists.
The police provided an effective cordon but
decided to evacuate the participants by bus
just before the march reached its final
destination.
DISCRIMINATION – PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES
The UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of
persons with disabilities asked the
government to urgently end the
institutionalization of people with disabilities
in psychiatric and psycho-neurological
residential institutions. Various laws allow the
forced detention and non-consensual
administration of psychiatric treatment for
people with disabilities as well as the non-
consensual termination of pregnancies on the
grounds of psychosocial or intellectual
impairment.
MONGOLIA
Mongolia
Head of state: Tsakhia Elbegdorj
Head of government: Jargaltulga Erdenebat (replaced
Chimediin Saikhanbileg in July)
The main opposition party Mongolia’s
People’s Party obtained the majority of
seats in the June parliamentary elections.
The new government postponed the
implementation of five laws passed by the
previous government, including a new
Criminal Code which would have abolished
256
the death penalty. The government failed to
protect human rights defenders from threats
and attacks by state agencies and non-state
actors. Torture and other ill-treatment
remained pervasive, particularly in custody.
Residents of the capital, Ulaanbaatar,
remained at risk of forced eviction and
violations of their right to adequate housing
because legislation did not conform to
international human rights law and
standards.
HOUSING RIGHTS
Despite the advanced stage of urban
redevelopment in Ulaanbaatar, relevant laws
and policies continued to lag behind practice
at both national and local levels. Large-scale
redevelopment in the ger areas − areas
without adequate access to essential
services − in Ulaanbaatar were initiated 10
years earlier to manage the city’s unplanned
population growth and increased pollution
levels. 1 In the absence of adequate
government regulation and effective
consultation and monitoring, individuals
affected by redevelopment were vulnerable to
human rights violations, particularly the right
to adequate housing.
In one case, redevelopment plans had a
devastating impact on residents. People in a
dilapidated building in the Sukhbaatar district
of Ulaanbaatar, including people with
disabilities and families with young children,
remained in apartments without heating
during the winter temperatures of -30°C in
2015-2016. The authorities relocated them to
temporary accommodation in October. Those
who were relocated remained at risk of a
wide range of human rights violations and
abuses without effective safeguards and
mechanisms for redress. 2
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
subjected to physical and psychological
threats and attacks by both state and non-
state actors. An investigation continued into
the suspicious death in late 2015 of
Lkhagvasumberel Tomorsukh, an
environmental activist from the Snow Leopard
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Conservation Foundation. The National
Human Rights Commission of Mongolia
reported that the law on NGOs and other
domestic laws did not fully protect the rights
of human rights defenders.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment in detention
centres continued to be widespread. The
authorities frequently transferred detainees
between detention centres or placed them in
centres far from their homes in order to
intimidate them and make their access to
legal counsel and family visits difficult.
1. Mongolia: Falling short − the right to adequate housing in
Ulaanbaatar (ASA 30/4933/2016)
2. Mongolia: 200 people face imminent risk of homelessness (ASA
30/3743/2016) and Further information (ASA 30/4793/2016)
MONTENEGRO
Montenegro
Head of state: Filip Vujanović
Head of government: Duško Marković (replaced Milo
Đukanović in November)
Parliamentary elections in October
cemented the rule of the governing coalition
led by Milo Đukanović; independent
election monitors reported irregularities in
dozens of polling stations.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In January and June, Montenegro resettled
two former detainees from the US detention
centre at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
In September, the government signed the
Additional Protocol to the Council of Europe
Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, to
tackle the issue of “foreign terrorist fighters”.
DISCRIMINATION – LESBIAN, GAY,
BISEXUAL, TRANSGENDER AND
INTERSEX PEOPLE
In May, two LGBTI organizations brought a
case before an administrative court against
the Ministry of Interior for failing to guarantee
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly by
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
allowing the police authorities to ban an
LGBTI Pride march in Nikšić, the second
largest town, three times consecutively. The
organizations’ initial complaint had been
rejected by the Ministry. In June, the court
rejected the applicants’ claims; the
organizations have turned to the
Constitutional Court to request a
constitutional review.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
By the end of the year, the authorities had
not acted on the recommendations of the UN
Committee on Enforced Disappearances to
include disappearance as a separate criminal
offence in the Criminal Code. The authorities
also failed to enable access to justice and
reparation for victims. Additionally,
Montenegro failed to ensure that the
continuous nature of enforced disappearance
was recognized in its system of criminal law.
The fate and whereabouts of the 61
individuals still reported missing following the
1991-1999 armed conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia were not investigated.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
Journalists continued to receive threats and
media offices were occasionally vandalized.
The Minister of Interior announced in June
that amendments to the Criminal Code would
be introduced to address the prevalent
impunity for attacks on journalists. A draft
had not been submitted by end of year.
The trial of Jovo Martinović, an
investigative journalist detained since October
2015, opened in late October. He was
accused of being involved in the criminal
network he was investigating. Human rights
groups and journalist associations expressed
concern that the charges were motivated by
his investigative work.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Over 1,600 refugees who fled to Montenegro
during the conflict in former Yugoslavia
remained without durable solutions. They still
lived in substandard conditions in camps
257without access to comprehensive integration
programmes. The refugees, the majority of
them Roma from Serbia/Kosovo, had not
received adequate support to acquire formal
international protection status, citizenship or
permanent residency rights. This prevented
them from accessing essential services,
including health care and employment
opportunities.
MOROCCO/
WESTERN SAHARA
Kingdom of Morocco
Head of state: King Mohamed VI
Head of government: Abdelilah Benkirane
The authorities restricted rights to freedom
of expression, association and assembly,
prosecuting journalists and forcibly
dispersing protests. Women faced
discrimination in law and in practice.
Consensual same-sex sexual relations
remained criminalized. Courts imposed
death sentences; there were no executions.
BACKGROUND
In March, the government forced the UN to
close a Military Liaison Office of the UN
Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) and withdraw civilian
staff after UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon referred to Morocco’s “occupation” of
Western Sahara. In April, the UN Security
Council extended MINURSO’s mandate for
another year without including any human
rights monitoring component. MINURSO had
not returned to its previous capacity by the
end of the year. 1
In September, Morocco submitted a
request to join the African Union (AU).
October saw protests against social and
economic grievances erupt in different parts
of the country. Residents clashed with police
when the authorities began demolishing
informal settlements in the town of Sidi Bibi,
near Agadir. Thousands of people took to the
258
streets in major cities including the capital,
Rabat, and Marrakech after Mouhcine Fikri,
a fish vendor, died trying to retrieve fish that
officials had confiscated from him in Al
Hoceima, in the Rif region. Al Hoceima also
witnessed large demonstrations. The protests
subsided after four days when the authorities
charged 11 people in connection with
Mouhcine Fikri’s death.
The UN Human Rights Committee
reviewed Morocco’s human rights record in
October. 2
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The authorities pursued their efforts to reform
the justice system. In February, Parliament
passed laws on the Higher Judicial Council
and the Statute for Judges but these failed to
establish judicial independence. In June, the
Council of Government approved draft
legislation to amend and complete the Penal
Code; it contained some progressive
provisions but failed to address the significant
deficiencies of the existing Code including
the death penalty and undue restrictions on
freedoms of expression and religion, among
others. The draft legislation had yet to be
enacted at the end of the year. A draft bill to
amend the Code of Criminal Procedure
remained under consideration.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to prosecute
journalists and critics for exercising their right
to freedom of peaceful expression. They
included Ali Anouzla, a leading independent
journalist charged in January with
advocating, supporting and inciting terrorism
in an article published on the website
Lakome.com in 2013. If convicted, he would
face up to 20 years in prison. Seven
journalists and activists faced charges that
included “undermining state security” and
“failing to report foreign funding” for
participating in a foreign-funded project to
train people in citizen journalism. If
convicted, they would face prison sentences
of up to five years. 3
In February, the Higher Judicial Council
dismissed Judge Mohamed El-Haini from
Amnesty International Report 2016/17office after the Minister of Justice and
Liberties accused him of violating the duty of
discretion and expressing opinions of a
political nature by criticizing the draft laws on
the Higher Judicial Council and the Statute
for Judges on social and other media.
A new Press Code adopted in August
removed imprisonment as a penalty for
exercising press freedom, one month after
the authorities amended the Penal Code to
criminalize certain forms of peaceful
expression.
FREEDOMS OF ASSOCIATION
AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to block the legal
registration of several human rights
organizations, including branches of the
Moroccan Association of Human Rights,
Freedom Now and the Maghreb Co-
ordination of Human Rights Organizations.
They also prevented human rights groups
and other associations from holding public
and other meetings and assemblies, and
continued to expel or deny entry to foreign
journalists, activists and human rights
defenders. In June, the International Institute
for Nonviolent Action (NOVACT), a Spanish
NGO, closed its Morocco office after the
authorities denied entry to two of its staff.
Amnesty International remained in dialogue
with the authorities to lift remaining
restrictions on its own fact-finding activities in
Morocco and Western Sahara.
The authorities continued to restrict the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly. In
January, police forcibly dispersed peaceful
protests by trainee teachers in Inezgane and
other cities, beating protesters with batons
and shields and injuring more than 150,
according to witnesses.
In August, a court sentenced eight activists
after an unfair trial to prison terms ranging
from four months to one year for participating
in a peaceful protest in Sidi Ifni, in southern
Morocco. 4 Convictions were upheld on
appeal in October, with one four-month
prison sentence reduced to three months.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
REPRESSION OF DISSENT –
SAHRAWI ACTIVISTS
The authorities continued to stifle peaceful
dissent in Western Sahara, dispersing
peaceful protests and prosecuting and
restricting Sahrawi activists who advocated
self-determination or reported human rights
violations. The authorities interrogated some
human rights defenders when they returned
from foreign travel, and continued to block
the legal registration of the Collective of
Sahrawi Human Rights Defenders (CODESA)
and other Sahrawi rights groups.
In July the Court of Cassation ruled that 23
Sahrawi protesters and activists imprisoned
following deadly clashes in 2010 in Gdeim
Izik should be re-tried before a civilian court.
Most had been sentenced in 2013 to long
prison terms after an unfair trial before a
military court based on “confessions” that
they alleged were obtained through torture.
The new civilian trial opened in late
December but was adjourned until January
2017. Twenty-one of the 23 remained in
prison at the end of the year. 5
The authorities continued to expel from or
bar entry to Western Sahara for foreign
journalists and activists as well as human
rights activists. In April, they expelled
Spanish, Belgian and French jurists and a
Spanish judge who had travelled to Rabat to
make representations on behalf of the Gdeim
Izik prisoners.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In April, security forces arrested Brahim
Saika, an activist of the Co-ordination of
Unemployed Sahrawis group in Guelmim, as
he left home to join a peaceful protest in
support of greater employment. He was
charged with insulting and assaulting public
officials and insulting a public institution, and
began a hunger strike after accusing the
police of ill-treating him in custody. Soon
afterwards he died in hospital while under
police custody. According to media reports,
an official autopsy concluded that his death
was caused by a virus but the authorities
failed to conduct an independent inquiry into
259his death, as his family requested, and
buried his remains against his family’s
wishes.
Dual Belgian-Moroccan national Ali
Aarrass remained in prison more than three
years after the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention concluded that he had
been convicted after an unfair trial based on
a torture-tainted “confession”. In June, he
alleged in an open letter that he and other
detainees had been subjected to ill-
treatment. He was transferred to Tiflet II Local
Prison in October and detained in solitary
confinement where he remained at the end
of the year. The Court of Cassation had yet to
rule on his case, more than four years after
hearing an appeal against his conviction. 6
Detainees protested against harsh prison
conditions, including poor hygiene,
inadequate nutrition and health care, and
severe overcrowding. A National Preventive
Mechanism had yet to be established, more
than two years after Morocco acceded to the
Optional Protocol to the UN Convention
against Torture, which requires such
mechanisms to be set up.
cases of incest and rape and on certain
medical grounds. However, the amendments
would include requirements for third party
notification and approval that could delay
access to legal abortions, putting pregnant
women’s health at risk. The amendments had
not been enacted by the end of the year.
In July, Parliament adopted a law
regulating employment of domestic workers,
predominantly women and girls. It
established 18 as the minimum age for
domestic workers but provided a five-year
transition period during which children aged
16 and 17 may continue to be employed as
domestic workers.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
The authorities failed to implement key
recommendations from the Equity and
Reconciliation Commission, 10 years after
the Commission published its report
examining human rights violations between
1956 and 1999. The authorities continued to prosecute and
imprison LGBTI people under Article 489 of
the Penal Code, which criminalizes
consensual same-sex sexual relations. In
March, they prosecuted two men who were
victims of a homophobic attack by youths in
the city of Beni Mellal. Film of the attack
sparked wide condemnation when it was
circulated on the internet. One of the attack
victims received a four-month prison term
under Article 489, suspended on appeal, and
a fine; the other received a three-month
suspended prison sentence. According to
news reports, two of their attackers were
sentenced to prison terms on appeal of four
months and six months respectively.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, the lower house of Parliament
adopted a long-awaited draft law on
combating violence against women, but the
draft remained under consideration before
the upper house at the end of the year. 7 It
contained some positive elements, including
measures to protect survivors of violence
during and after judicial proceedings, but
without significant strengthening it would not
afford women effective protection against
violence and discrimination.
The Penal Code continued to criminalize
abortion. The authorities proposed
amendments that would allow exceptions in The authorities continued to prevent people
from sub-Saharan Africa from irregularly
entering the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and
Melilla in northern Morocco, with some
people alleging excessive use of force by the
Moroccan and Spanish authorities. The
authorities repeatedly destroyed makeshift
camps around the northeastern city of Nador
and displaced dozens of people to cities in
the south, according to human rights groups.
In July, lawmakers adopted legislation
approving Morocco’s ratification of ILO
Convention 143 on Migrant Workers. In
August the government promulgated a new
IMPUNITY
260
Amnesty International Report 2016/17law to combat human trafficking. In
December, King Mohammed VI announced a
new wave of regularization of undocumented
migrants.
The authorities again failed to establish a
national asylum system but allowed refugees
access to basic rights and services, including
education. They issued Syrians registered by
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, with
documents protecting them against
refoulement without taking a decision on their
definitive status.
POLISARIO CAMPS
The Polisario Front again failed to hold to
account those responsible for committing
human rights abuses in camps under its
control during the 1970s and 1980s. Brahim
Ghali became Secretary General of the
Polisario Front following the death of
Mohamed Abdelaziz in May.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; there have been no executions
since 1993. In July, the authorities
commuted the death sentences of 23 people
to life imprisonment.
1. UN must monitor human rights in Western Sahara and Sahrawi
refugee camps (News story, 26 April)
2. Morocco: The authorities must swiftly implement the
recommendations of the UN Human Rights Committee (MDE
29/5158/2016)
3. Morocco ramps up crackdown on press freedom with trial over citizen
journalism (News story, 26 January)
4. Morocco: Sidi Ifni protesters must be given fair appeal trial and
released unless assault charges are proved (MDE 29/4763/2016)
5. Morocco/Western Sahara: Further information – Sahrawi defendants
granted civilian re-trial (MDE 29/4615/2016)
6. Morocco: Torture survivor still detained despite UN calls for his
immediate release (MDE 29/4119/2016)
7. Morocco: Violence against women bill needs stronger safeguards
(MDE 29/4007/2016)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
MOZAMBIQUE
Republic of Mozambique
Head of state and government: Filipe Jacinto Nyusi
The security forces and opposition members
and supporters committed human rights
abuses with impunity, including killings,
torture and other ill-treatment. Thousands
of refugees fled to Malawi and Zimbabwe.
People expressing dissent or criticizing
human rights violations, political and
military instability or the country’s hidden
debts faced attacks and intimidation.
BACKGROUND
Violent clashes continued between the ruling
party, the Mozambique Liberation Front
(FRELIMO), and the main opposition party,
the Mozambique National Resistance
(RENAMO), in the centre of Mozambique.
On 5 March, President Nyusi invited
Afonso Dhlakama, leader of RENAMO, to
talks on “restoring peace in the country”.
Talks between FRELIMO and RENAMO
teams started. On 10 June, the teams agreed
to invite international mediators to facilitate
talks around four points: RENAMO governing
the six provinces where it claims it won
elections in 2014; the cessation of armed
activity; the formation of joint armed forces,
police and intelligence services; and the
disarmament and reintegration of RENAMO
armed members.
In August, the mediators presented a
proposed agreement. However, the parties
disagreed over the condition that the
government should withdraw its armed forces
from the Gorongosa region, where Afonso
Dhlakama is based, and no agreement was
reached. Talks were continuing at the end of
the year.
In April, the existence of hidden borrowing
of more than US$1 billion for security and
defence spending came to light. The
disclosure led to the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and other international donors
suspending financial aid to Mozambique
pending an independent international audit.
261In August, a parliamentary inquiry
commission was established to investigate,
but it had a majority of FRELIMO members
and was boycotted by RENAMO. The
commission’s findings were discussed in
Parliament on 9 December in a closed
session. The report had not been made
public by the end of the year.
Mozambique’s human rights record was
examined under the UN Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) process in June; Mozambique
accepted 180 and rejected 30
recommendations. Recommendations on the
ratification of the International Convention
against enforced disappearance and the
Rome Statute of the ICC, and on freedom of
expression and corporate accountability were
among those rejected. 1
LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY
Members of the armed forces, police officials
and secret service agents reportedly
committed human rights violations against a
number of people they suspected to be
members or supporters of RENAMO. The
violations included extrajudicial executions,
torture and other ill-treatment, arbitrary
detentions and destruction of property. There
was continued impunity for such crimes
under international law and human
rights violations.
On 10 May, Benedito Sabão, a subsistence
farmer from the town of Catandica, Manica
province, was arbitrarily arrested, ill-treated
and shot at by suspected secret service
agents, allegedly for supporting RENAMO. He
survived the attack but continued to receive
threats. 2 Those suspected of criminal
responsibility for the attack had not been
identified, let alone brought to justice, by the
end of the year.
In June, a group of Mozambican
subsistence farmers in a refugee camp in
Malawi said that their village in Tete province
in Mozambique had been invaded by four
vehicles with about 60 civilians armed with
guns and machetes; the village had been
labelled a RENAMO stronghold. The
attackers set the village ablaze and torched
crops that the farmers lived off. The refugees
262
believed that these men were members of
the armed forces.
RENAMO members and supporters
reportedly looted health facilities and carried
out attacks on highways and police stations,
resulting in a number of casualties among
the general population, as well as attacking
the police and armed forces. The government
failed to investigate and prosecute crimes
against the general population committed by
members and supporters of RENAMO.
In May, local and international media and
civil society organizations reported the
discovery of unidentified bodies and a mass
grave near the Gorongosa region. An
investigation was launched in June, but
neither the bodies nor those suspected of
responsibility had been identified at the end
of the year.
On 8 October, Jeremias Pondeca, a senior
RENAMO member and part of the mediation
team to end the conflict between RENAMO
and the government, was shot dead in the
capital Maputo by unidentified men believed
to be members of a death squad composed
of security officers. Those suspected of
criminal responsibility for the attack had not
been identified at the end of the year.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, nearly 10,000 Mozambicans sought
refuge in Malawi and Zimbabwe during the
year. The Mozambican government did not
recognize them as refugees, but considered
them as economic migrants.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Intimidation and attacks against people
expressing dissenting or critical views,
including journalists and human rights
defenders, occurred throughout the year.
On 23 May, political commentator and
university professor José Jaime Macuane was
abducted outside his home in Maputo by
unidentified men believed to be members of
a death squad composed of security officers.
The men shot him in the legs and dumped
him by the roadside in Marracuene district,
30km north of Maputo. The kidnappers told
Amnesty International Report 2016/17him that they had been ordered to leave him
lame. José Jaime Macuane had publicly
addressed issues of political governance, the
ongoing clashes between FRELIMO and
RENAMO, the hidden debts and violations of
the right to freedom of expression. Those
responsible for the abduction and shooting
had not been identified at the end of the year.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
After the disclosure of hidden debts in April,
a demonstration was called anonymously via
text messages and social media. On 25 April,
the police announced that any unauthorized
demonstration would be repressed. On 28
and 29 April, the police reinforced their
presence in the streets of Maputo but no
demonstration took place.
In May, political parties without
parliamentary representation and civil society
organizations called for a peaceful
demonstration to protest against the country’s
hidden debts and political and military
instability. However, Maputo City Council
refused to allow the protest to take place.
João Massango, a leading member of the
Ecology Party, was one of the organizers of
this protest. On 20 May, he was the victim of
an attempted abduction and was beaten by
unidentified armed men believed to be
members of a death squad composed of
security officers in Maputo. Those
responsible for the attack had not been
identified at the end of the year.
1. Mozambique: Amnesty International welcomes commitment to
investigate extrajudicial executions, torture and other ill-treatment
(AFR 41/4449/2016)
2. Mozambique: Accused of being opposition member, shot at: Benedito
Sabão (AFR 41/4099/2016)
MYANMAR
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Head of state and government: Htin Kyaw (replaced
Thein Sein in March)
The formation of a new civilian-led
government did not lead to significant
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
improvements in the human rights
situation. The persecuted Rohingya minority
faced increased violence and
discrimination. Religious intolerance and
anti-Muslim sentiment intensified. Fighting
between the army and ethnic armed groups
escalated in northern Myanmar. The
government increased restrictions on access
for UN and other humanitarian agencies to
displaced communities. Although scores of
prisoners of conscience were released,
restrictions on freedoms of expression, of
association and of peaceful assembly
remained. Impunity persisted for past and
ongoing human rights violations.
BACKGROUND
Parliament convened for the first time on 1
February following the November 2015
elections in which the National League for
Democracy won a landslide victory. In March,
Htin Kyaw was elected as President and the
formal transfer of power took place the same
month. Aung San Suu Kyi remained
constitutionally barred from holding the
presidency but in April was appointed State
Counsellor, a role created especially for her,
which made her the de facto leader of the
civilian government. Despite this, the military
retained significant political power, with an
allocated 25% of seats in Parliament which
gave it a veto over constitutional changes,
and control over key ministries. The military
remained independent of civilian oversight.
DISCRIMINATION
The Rohingya minority
The situation of the Rohingya deteriorated
significantly after attacks on border police
outposts in northern Rakhine State in
October by suspected Rohingya militants.
Nine police officers were killed. Security
forces responded with a major security
operation, conducting “clearance operations”
and sealing the area, effectively barring
humanitarian organizations, media and
independent human rights monitors from
entering. Security forces were responsible for
unlawful killings, random firing on civilians,
rape and arbitrary arrests. 1 Tens of thousands
263of people were displaced after their homes
were destroyed, and at least 27,000 fled to
Bangladesh. The response collectively
punished the entire Rohingya community in
northern Rakhine State and the conduct of
the security forces may have amounted to
crimes against humanity. The government
issued blanket denials that security forces
had carried out human rights violations. An
investigation commission established by the
government in December lacked credibility
as it was headed by a former army general
and its members included the Chief of Police.
Elsewhere in Rakhine State, the situation
remained serious, with Rohingya and other
Muslim people facing severe restrictions to
their freedom of movement. They were
confined to their villages or displacement
camps and segregated from other
communities. Access to their livelihoods, to
health care including life-saving treatment,
food security and education were greatly
restricted.
Most Rohingya people remained deprived
of a nationality. Government efforts to restart
a citizenship verification process stalled, with
many Rohingya rejecting it because it was
based on the discriminatory 1982 Citizenship
Law.
The government established two
committees in an attempt to resolve the
situation: the Central Committee on
Implementation of Peace, Stability and
Development of Rakhine State in May,
chaired by Aung San Suu Kyi; and in August,
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
chaired by former UN Secretary-General Kofi
Annan.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Discrimination, religious intolerance and anti-
Muslim sentiment intensified, particularly
following the October attacks in Rakhine
State. The authorities failed to take effective
action to counter advocacy of religious
hatred, or to bring the perpetrators of attacks
against religious minorities to justice.
A mob attack in Bago Region in June left
one man injured and a mosque and other
Muslim-owned buildings destroyed. The
264
Region’s Chief Minister told the media that no
action would be taken against the suspected
perpetrators. 2 In July, a mob attacked a
Muslim prayer hall in Hpakant Township,
Kachin State, for which five people were
arrested but no one was brought to justice by
the end of the year.
INTERNAL ARMED CONFLICT
In August, the new government held the
“Union Peace Conference-21 st Century
Panglong”, which aimed to move the
nationwide peace process forward. It was
expected to convene every six months. The
Conference was attended by the military,
representatives of most ethnic armed groups
and the UN Secretary-General.
Despite these efforts, fighting continued in
some parts of the country. Between April and
September conflict between the Kachin
Independence Army and the Myanmar Army
escalated with the latter resorting to
air strikes and shelling, killing and injuring
civilians. During September, fighting erupted
in Kayin State when the Border Guard Force
and the Myanmar Army clashed with a
splinter group from the Democratic Karen
Benevolent Army. Further fighting broke out
between the Myanmar Army and the Arakan
Army in Rakhine State. In November, the
Brotherhood of the Northern Alliance, a new
coalition of four armed ethnic groups in
northern Myanmar, launched co-ordinated
attacks on security outposts in Kachin and
northern Shan states. The groups said the
attacks were in response to ongoing
offensives by the Myanmar Army.
Reports of violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law in areas
of armed conflict persisted. Violations
included rape and other crimes of sexual
violence, forced labour, arbitrary arrests,
torture and other ill-treatment, the use of
landmines and recruitment of child soldiers.
The Myanmar Army had discharged 101
children and young adults from its forces by
the end of the year.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17LACK OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
From April, the government increased
restrictions on access for UN and other
humanitarian agencies and actors to
displaced communities in areas not under its
control in northern Myanmar. 3 It considered
requiring displaced people in these areas to
cross internal front lines to receive aid, a
move which if implemented would violate
international humanitarian law.
In Rakhine State, international
humanitarian agencies were required to
undergo cumbersome procedures to obtain
travel authorization to provide services to
vulnerable communities. Following the
October attacks in northern Rakhine State, all
pre-existing humanitarian services were
suspended, affecting over 150,000 people.
While services resumed in some areas, an
estimated 30,000 internally displaced people
(IDPs) had no access to sustained
humanitarian aid because of security
operations by the end of the year.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
According to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
there were over 250,000 IDPs in Myanmar.
They included over 100,000 people
displaced by fighting in Kachin and northern
Shan states and 150,000 people, mostly
Rohingya, in Rakhine State.
Around 100,000 refugees continued to live
in nine camps in Thailand. In October, the
first pilot voluntary return of 71 people began,
supported by the Myanmar and Thailand
governments, and UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, and other agencies. Many other
refugees remained in Thailand and continued
to express fears about returning to Myanmar.
PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE
On 8 April, one week after the new
government assumed office, dozens of
student protesters detained since March
2015 were released. On 17 April, 83
prisoners, including many prisoners of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
conscience, were released following a
presidential pardon. 4
Prisoners of conscience remained held,
and politically motivated arrests and
imprisonment continued. Dozens of people
were investigated for “online defamation”
under the 2013 Telecommunications Act, a
vaguely worded law used increasingly to stifle
peaceful criticism of the authorities. In
October, Hla Phone was sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment for “online defamation”
and “incitement” for criticizing the former
government and the Myanmar Army
on Facebook.
Former prisoners of conscience continued
to face a range of problems arising from the
effects of their prison conditions and their
status as former prisoners including lack of
medical and psychological care, access to
education and employment opportunities.
There were no government programmes
providing support and rehabilitation to former
prisoners or their families.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The new government initiated a review of
certain repressive laws, and repealed the
1975 State Protection Act and the 1950
Emergency Provisions Act which had been
used to imprison peaceful critics of former
governments. However, other repressive laws
remained, leaving human rights defenders at
risk of arrest and imprisonment for their
peaceful activities. 5 The legal reform process
lacked transparency and Parliament failed to
consult adequately with civil society and legal
experts. Proposed amendments to the 2012
Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession
Act fell far short of requirements under
international human rights law and
standards. 6 A draft privacy and security bill
contained multiple provisions which, if
adopted, could arbitrarily restrict the right to
freedom of expression, and other rights.
Human rights defenders, lawyers and
journalists continued to face intimidation,
harassment and surveillance by the
authorities. They reported being followed;
photographed when attending events and
265meetings; late-night inspections of their
homes and offices; and harassment of family
members. Women human rights defenders
were particularly vulnerable to sexual
harassment and intimidation.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In October, Parliament adopted a new
Investment Law. However, there were no
provisions protecting people against forced
eviction or from the impact of pollution
caused by business.
In May, protests resumed at the
Letpadaung mine following an
announcement that it had started producing
copper. Two protest leaders were
subsequently charged with criminal offences
and faced a maximum of four years’
imprisonment. The Letpadaung project had a
long history of causing forced eviction and
violent repression of protests against the
mine although no one had been held
to account.
In October, the Ministry of Industry
renewed the operating licence of the Moe
Gyo acid factory which processes copper for
the Letpadaung and S&K mines. The licence
was renewed despite serious concerns that
the health of villagers living nearby was
adversely affected; and despite a decision by
the Salyingyi municipal authorities not to
renew the factory’s licence pending an
assessment of its health and environmental
impact.
DEATH PENALTY
No executions were carried out although
courts continued to impose death sentences.
In January, then President Thein Sein
commuted the death sentences of 77
prisoners to life imprisonment. In October,
Parliament repealed the 1950 Emergency
Provisions Act which allowed for the death
penalty. The death penalty remained under
other laws.
LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY
The institutional and legislative framework
maintained obstacles to holding perpetrators
of human rights violations to account, and
266
delivering justice, truth and reparations to
victims and their families. Most perpetrators
of past and current human rights violations
continued to evade justice.
In January, just days before it was
dissolved, Parliament adopted the Former
Presidents Security Law, which could grant
immunity to former presidents for crimes
committed while they were in office,
including for crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other crimes under international
law. 7
In July, the army made a rare public
admission of wrongdoing when it announced
that seven soldiers had killed five villagers in
northern Shan State and that a court-martial
was underway. They were sentenced to five
years in prison with hard labour in
September. While a step forward for military
transparency, the case also highlighted the
need for reform in the military and civilian
justice systems. Under the 2008 Constitution,
the military retains control over its own
judicial processes, including when allegations
of human rights violations are involved.
The Myanmar National Human Rights
Commission remained ineffectual in
responding to reports of human rights
violations and lacked independence. In
October, four Commissioners resigned after
the media reported that they had negotiated
a financial settlement in a case involving
child forced labour and ill-treatment.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
For the first time in 25 years, the UN General
Assembly did not adopt a resolution on
Myanmar after the EU decided not to
propose a draft text. None of the key human
rights recommendations in previous
resolutions had been fully implemented. 8
The UN Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar made
two official visits to the country. While her
access improved, she reported ongoing
surveillance and harassment of civil society
members she met. She also reported finding
a recording device placed by a government
official during a community meeting in
Rakhine State.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17In March, the UN Human Rights Council
adopted the outcome of the UN Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) process on Myanmar.
Although Myanmar accepted over half of the
recommendations, it rejected key
recommendations on the rights to freedom of
expression, of association and of peaceful
assembly, and the situation of the Rohingya. 9
In July, the UN Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women raised
concerns about discriminatory laws, barriers
to justice for women and girls, and their
under-representation in the peace process. 10
There was still no agreement to establish
an Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Myanmar.
1. “We are at breaking point”: Rohingya – Persecuted in Myanmar,
neglected in Bangladesh (ASA 15/5362/2016)
2. Myanmar: Investigate violent destruction of mosque buildings (News
story, 24 June)
3. Myanmar: Lift restrictions immediately on humanitarian aid (News
story, 24 October)
4. Myanmar: Continue efforts to release all remaining prisoners of
conscience (ASA 16/3981/2016)
5. New expression meets old repression: Ending the cycle of political
arrests and imprisonment in Myanmar (ASA 16/3430/2016)
6. Myanmar: Open letter on amending the Peaceful Assembly and
Peaceful Procession Act (ASA 16/4024/2016)
7. Myanmar: Scrap or amend new law that could grant immunity to
former president (News story, 28 January)
8. Myanmar: Why a UNGA resolution is still needed (ASA 16/4745/2016)
9. Myanmar: Amnesty International calls on Myanmar to protect the
rights of Rohingya and to release all prisoners of conscience (ASA
16/3670/2016)
10. Myanmar: Briefing to the UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (ASA 16/4240/2016)
NAMIBIA
Republic of Namibia
Head of state and government: Hage Gottfried Geingob
Detainees acquitted after the long-running
Caprivi treason trial lived in fear of being
rearrested after the Prosecutor General
decided to appeal against the court ruling.
There was a high incidence of gender-based
violence, including rape, against women
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
and girls. Violations of the right to freedom
of expression continued.
BACKGROUND
Despite calls for the introduction of a
universal basic income grant after a
successful pilot project, the government
announced its intention to introduce food
banks in urban and peri-urban areas, failing
to address widespread extreme poverty in
rural areas.
CAPRIVI DETAINEES
Forty-two released Caprivi detainees –
accused of treason after their arrests in 1999
and acquitted between 2013 and 2015 –
continued to live in fear after facing threats
and intimidation. On 17 May, they were
notified that the Prosecutor General would
appeal against their acquittals.
The Vice Chairperson of the Caprivi
Concerned Group (CCG), Retief Kangongo,
went missing on 30 April following alleged
threats by the Inspector General of the
Namibian police. The CCG supported the
acquitted detainees. Retief Kangongo
reportedly sought asylum in Botswana.
In August, the Supreme Court ruled in
favour of Boster Mubuyaeta Samuele, one of
the Caprivi detainees. He had fled to
Bostwana, and, in December 2002, he was
abducted by Namibian security forces in
Botswana and brought to Namibia to face
trial. He then spent 13 years in prison. Boster
Mubuyaeta Samuele successfully argued that
the Namibian courts had no jurisdiction to
prosecute him since Namibian officials had
violated international law when he was
abducted and arbitrarily detained.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 15 April, two Japanese journalists
employed by Japan’s television group Asahi
were briefly detained by Namibian security
forces soon after interviewing the Deputy
Prime Minister Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah at
the Hosea Kutako International Airport. The
journalists interviewed the Deputy Prime
Minister in connection with a munitions
factory being built by nationals of the
267Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(North Korea) in Namibia. Their cameras and
laptops were confiscated by Namibian
security forces.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Gender-based violence, including rape,
against women and girls continued at a high
rate as the government failed to address the
problem adequately.
For example, on 20 June, Janet Haoes
was strangled with electric wire, stabbed
several times and hit with a hammer by her
partner in the Otjomuise suburb of the
capital, Windhoek. On 26 August, the body of
Rosina Gaoses, who was pregnant, was
found in the riverbed in the Dolam suburb of
Windhoek. The body showed signs that she
had been raped before being murdered.
Although the Namibian police initiated
some investigations into cases of gender-
based violence, efforts to eradicate violence
against women and girls remained
inadequate.
NAURU
Republic of Nauru
Head of state and government: Baron Waqa
The Crimes Act 2016 contained provisions
to protect human rights but was
inadequately implemented. Concerns about
the denial of the rights to freedom of
expression and of peaceful assembly,
freedom of movement and access to the
country for foreign media persisted.
Passports of several former MPs were
suspended. Nauru continued to hold
hundreds of refugees and asylum-seekers in
a centre while others were placed in the
community under its transfer agreement
with Australia. The death penalty was
repealed for all crimes in May.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The Crimes Act 2016, which came into force
in May, decriminalized same-sex relations,
268
abortions carried out by medical
professionals and criminalized marital rape.
The authorities took no steps to implement
the law to protect women and girls from
gender-based violence or to ensure their
access to sexual and reproductive health
information and services, particularly
affecting those in remote locations and/or in
marginalized communities.
The Act criminalized the buying and
selling of sex, impeding sex workers’ access
to sexual and reproductive health information
and services and making them vulnerable to
exploitation, abuse, violence and other
crimes. It also adversely impacted HIV
treatment and prevention.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
In September, new laws granted the Foreign
Ministry powers to cancel passports without
court review. Twenty Nauruans claimed that
the Ministry cancelled their passports. They
included opposition MPs who were
suspended after being charged in 2015 in
connection with a pro-democracy rally in
2014. In September, Sprent Dabwido, former
MP, was prevented from leaving Nauru for
medical care. The government later reversed
the decision. Roland Kun, a former MP, had
his passport confiscated in 2015 after he was
charged in connection with speaking to
foreign media and protests against the
government. He was granted a New Zealand
passport and fled Nauru in July.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
There were around 1,200 refugees and
asylum-seekers remaining in Nauru. As of 30
November, there were 383 in the Australian-
run Regional Processing Centre (RPC), of
whom 44 were children, 49 women and 290
men (see Australia entry). There were around
800 refugees living in the community.
There was evidence that children were
assaulted by staff working for companies
hired by the Australian government to run the
RCP and by private individuals. Health care
was inadequate and many children were not
attending school. Reports of attempted
suicide and self-harm were commonplace.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Omid Masoumali, an Iranian refugee, died
after setting himself on fire in April. The
authorities failed to protect refugees and
asylum-seekers from continued physical and
verbal attacks by the community, as well as
arbitrary arrest and detention. The conditions
amounted to torture and caused severe
psychological harm. 1
In August, the UK newspaper The
Guardian published over 2,000 leaked
incident reports (known as the “Nauru Files”)
which had been recorded by staff employed
at the RPC. The files documented incidents
including physical and sexual abuse of
refugees and asylum-seekers, including
children, in Nauru, as well as cases of
hunger strikes, self-harm and medical
emergencies.
In November, the Australian government
announced that some of the refugees
detained in Nauru and Papua New Guinea’s
Manus Island would be resettled in the USA
(see Papua New Guinea entry).
1. Island of despair: Australia’s “processing” of refugees on Nauru (ASA
12/4934/2016)
NEPAL
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
Head of state: Bidhya Devi Bhandari
Head of government: Pushpa Kamal Dahal (replaced
Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli in August)
Tens of thousands of people continued to
be denied the right to adequate housing
and other human rights following the 2015
earthquake. Marginalized groups expressed
dissatisfaction with constitutional
amendments, on the grounds that they did
not address discriminatory clauses. The use
of torture and unnecessary or excessive
force against protesters in the Tarai region
were not effectively investigated. There was
little progress on justice for the grave
human rights violations committed during
the armed conflict. Migrant workers were
exploited by recruitment companies despite
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
a new government policy regulating the
sector. Discrimination on the basis of
gender, caste, class, ethnic origin, sexual
orientation, gender identity and religion
persisted. Women and girls were not
adequately protected against gender-based
violence.
RIGHT TO ADEQUATE HOUSING
Hundreds of thousands of people affected by
the April 2015 earthquake continued to live
in temporary shelters. The National
Reconstruction Authority began work in
January and reconstruction officially started
in April. By December, detailed housing
damage assessments were completed for 11
of the 14 worst affected districts. Grant
distributions to enable people to reconstruct
their houses were delayed and people
affected expected to endure another cold
season lacking basic shelter and other
essential services. In September, Prime
Minister Dahal announced a grant increase
from around US$1,850 to 2,800 which was
approved by the cabinet in late December.
In July the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child expressed concern about the
earthquake’s impact on children’s rights and
the number of displaced children living in
camps for internally displaced people or
informal settlements, without adequate
access to food, safe drinking water,
sanitation, health care or education.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The use of torture and unnecessary or
excessive force against protesters in the Tarai
region were not effectively investigated.
Madhesi and other marginalized groups in
the Tarai continued to protest against the
2015 Constitution and its January
amendments which, they claimed,
discriminated against them and denied them
fair political representation. Protesters
blocked border crossings with India resulting
in severe shortages of fuel, food, medicine
and construction materials.
In August, an official commission to
investigate incidents of excessive force by
security forces in the Tarai during these
269protests which resulted in the killing of 27
men, four women and six children, and other
incidents, was established but made little
progress.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The recruitment industry continued to be
poorly regulated and allowed for the
widespread abuse of migrants’ rights.
Subjected to extortionate recruitment fees,
Nepalese working abroad were exposed to
debt bondage, labour trafficking and forced
labour. The abuse of migrants in destination
countries was facilitated by, on the one hand,
restrictive labour migration laws and, on the
other hand, poorly implemented laws. There
were few investigations into or prosecutions
of local agents and private agencies for
such abuses.
Labour migration law and policy were
ineffective, and there was little improvement
in protection mechanisms for migrant
workers. The government’s no-fee
recruitment system largely failed because it
was inadequately implemented or monitored.
As a result of age restrictions placed on
women migrant workers, women frequently
turned to informal channels to undertake
foreign employment which left them
susceptible to human trafficking.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture in police custody continued,
particularly during pre-trial detention to
extract confessions and intimidate people.
In September, the Torture and Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (Control)
Bill was tabled before Parliament but had not
been adopted by the end of the year. It
contained provisions that did not meet
international human rights standards, such
as an overly narrow definition of torture and a
90-day time limit for registering complaints.
In February, Kumar Lama, a Nepal Army
Colonel, was tried by a UK court under the
universal jurisdiction principle on two charges
of torture committed in Nepal. He was
acquitted of one charge in July and released
in September after the prosecuting
authorities decided not to proceed to a retrial
270
on the second charge, as the jury had been
unable to reach a verdict.
IMPUNITY
In May, the ruling Communist Party of Nepal
Unified Marxist Leninist and the Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) agreed an
amnesty for perpetrators of human rights
abuses during the conflict. In July, the
Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)
and the Nepali Congress agreed to form a
coalition government with an understanding
that the Commission on Truth and
Reconciliation (TRC) and the Commission on
Investigation of Enforced Disappeared
Persons (CIEDP) would focus on
reconciliation and compensation, and not
prioritize criminal prosecutions for past
human rights violations.
The 2014 Truth and Reconciliation
Commission Act retained language which
allowed amnesties for serious crimes under
international law, despite the Supreme
Court’s ruling against these provisions in
2015. The government did not amend the
law. The TRC and the CIEDP began
registering complaints in mid-April, 14
months after their establishment. Officials of
both commissions raised concerns about
government delays and non-co-operation,
lack of resources and unrealistically short
deadlines for filing cases.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, the office of Prime Minister Oli
summoned commissioners of the National
Human Rights Commission for questioning
about a statement they made while Nepal
was being examined under the UN Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) process.
In May, Kanak Dixit, a journalist and
activist, was arrested by the Commission for
the Investigation of Abuse of Authority on
corruption charges. Ten days after his arrest,
the Supreme Court ruled that his detention
was illegal and ordered his release. Kanak
Dixit said his arrest was an attempt to silence
his critical views. In the same month,
Canadian national residing in Nepal, Robert
Penner, was arrested and deported for
Amnesty International Report 2016/17sowing “social discord” in social media.
During the year, Madhesi activist Chandra
Kant Raut and several supporters faced
multiple sedition charges for peacefully
expressing political opinions.
DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination on the basis of gender, caste,
class, ethnic origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity and religion persisted.
Constitutional amendments did not guarantee
equal rights to citizenship for women, or
provide protection from discrimination to
marginalized communities, including Dalits
and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex people.
The law criminalizing rape was amended
so that the statute of limitations on reporting
the crime was raised from 35 to 180 days
rather than being abolished altogether as
required by human rights standards. Gender-
based discrimination continued to undermine
women's and girls’ rights to control their
sexuality and make informed choices related
to reproduction; challenge early and forced
marriages; and enjoy adequate antenatal and
maternal health care. Women continued to
face domestic violence, including marital
rape. Women from marginalized groups,
including Dalits and Indigenous women,
remained at greater risk of intersecting forms
of discrimination.
NETHERLANDS
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Head of state: King Willem-Alexander
Head of government: Mark Rutte
Irregular migrants continued to be routinely
deprived of their liberty and the government
still did not adequately consider alternatives
to detention. Ethnic profiling by the police
continued to be a matter of serious
concern.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
placed in solitary confinement as a punitive
measure for “disturbing public order” during
the evacuation.
In October, a draft law regulating
immigration detention was tabled before
Parliament. It offered minor improvements,
but major concerns remained as irregular
migrants could be deprived of their liberty for
a wide range of reasons. The punitive
character of the detention regime also
remained in place. Furthermore, the draft law
included powers to hold migrants in a cell for
at least 16 hours a day.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
The authorities remained unwilling to
implement the recommendation by the
European Committee of Social Rights that all
people, including irregular migrants, should
have unconditional access to shelter and
other basic necessities.
DISCRIMINATION
Ethnic profiling by police
Ethnic profiling by the police continued to be
a matter of serious concern. While the
authorities acknowledged the damaging
effects of ethnic profiling, they failed to
formulate a comprehensive plan for the fair
and effective use of stop-and-search powers.
The police also continued to refuse to
systematically monitor and record stop-and-
search operations, making it difficult to
assess whether measures to combat ethnic
profiling, such as training, diversity
management and dialogue with communities,
were effective in reducing discrimination.
Partial ban on face-covering
A government proposal for a ban on face-
covering attire in certain spaces, such as
public transport and public educational and
health care institutions, passed the House of
Representatives in November but was still
pending before the Senate. The ban would
restrict the rights to freedom of religion and of
expression, particularly of Muslim women.
Following a fire in a detention facility in
Rotterdam on 25 May, several migrants were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
271COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In May, the House of Representatives passed
two controversial administrative counter-
terrorism bills, which were likely to be
debated by the Senate in early 2017. If
enacted, the laws would enable the Minister
of Security and Justice to impose
administrative control measures on
individuals, including travel bans, based on
indications that they may pose a future
terrorist risk. It would also allow for the
revocation of Dutch nationality of dual
citizens who have travelled abroad to join a
foreign terrorist group and are believed to
pose a risk to national security. The
procedures to appeal the imposition of the
measures lacked effective safeguards.
In October, a draft law on the Intelligence
and Security Services was presented to
Parliament. If enacted, the law would
legitimize sweeping surveillance powers for
the intelligence and security services,
potentially leading to violations of the right to
privacy, the right to freedom of expression
and the right to non-discrimination. The draft
law provides insufficient safeguards against
abuse of powers by the intelligence and
security services, and there are serious
concerns that communications could be
shared with other countries where the
information could be used for human rights
violations.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Since February, Nada Kiswanson, a human
rights lawyer based in The Hague,
representing the Palestinian NGO Al-Haq,
has been the subject of ongoing threats in
response to her work at the International
Criminal Court. She has received several
death threats and been subjected to
interference of her communications,
intimidation, harassment and defamation.
However, only in April did the Dutch
authorities take specific measures to protect
her and launch an investigation.
272
NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by
Patricia Lee Reddy (replaced Jerry Mateparae in
September)
Head of government: Bill English (replaced John Key in
December)
New Zealand received criticism from the
UN Human Rights Committee and
Committee on the Rights of the Child for its
high rates of Indigenous Māori
incarceration, child poverty and domestic
violence. The state’s refugee resettlement
quota was marginally increased.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Rates of Māori representation among those
facing the criminal justice system remained
disproportionately high. An Ombudsman
investigation was launched into the
circumstances in which an intellectually
disabled man was held in a health facility for
five years, often in isolation, in conditions
amounting to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. The government announced that it
was considering a formal extradition treaty
with China, where criminal suspects could be
at risk of serious human rights violations.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The government announced plans to
increase the annual refugee resettlement
quota from 750 to 1,000 by 2018. As of
March, two refugees were held in detention
facilities alongside remand detainees. The
Human Rights Committee expressed
concerns over disparities in the quality of
services provided to refugees who arrived
under the humanitarian quota system and
other categories of refugees. In June, New
Zealand publicly reiterated the agreement to
annually resettle 150 refugees from Nauru
and Manus. The agreement was made in
2013 with the Australian government but
Australia has since refused to carry out the
deal.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Sexual and other physical violence against
women and girls remained high, despite wide
recognition of the problem and efforts to
address it. The Human Rights Committee
expressed concern about low rates of
reporting and prosecution of perpetrators. An
overhaul of domestic violence laws was
announced. After years of insufficient
funding, the government announced NZ$46
million (US$33 million) will be provided to
support services for victims of sexual
violence.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The 2016 Technical Report on Child Poverty
found that nearly one in three New Zealand
children live below the poverty line. The
Human Rights Committee expressed concern
about the significant number of children
suffering physical and psychological abuse
and neglect. The government announced the
creation of a Ministry for Vulnerable Children,
to be implemented in 2017.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
By the end of the year, the government had
still not formally responded to
recommendations by the 2013 Constitutional
Advisory Panel to improve the Bill of Rights
Act 1990. Economic, social and cultural
rights continued to lack full protection in
domestic legislation, as recommended by the
Advisory Panel.
NICARAGUA
Republic of Nicaragua
Head of state and government: Daniel Ortega Saavedra
Conflict over land in the North Atlantic
Autonomous Region sparked violent attacks
against Miskitu Indigenous Peoples. Human
rights defenders continued to experience
threats and intimidation because of their
work. Indigenous and Afro-descendant
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
communities denounced violations of their
rights to consultation and free, prior and
informed consent in the context of the
development of the Grand Interoceanic
Canal. Communities and human rights
organizations expressed concern at the
potential negative impact of the Canal on
their lives. A total abortion ban remained in
place.
BACKGROUND
In November, Daniel Ortega of the Sandinista
Front for National Liberation (FSLN) was re-
elected President for a third consecutive
term. Rosario Murillo, his wife, was elected
Vice-President for the first time. According to
media reports, the FSLN also increased their
representation in the Congress.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Impunity for gender-based violence against
women persisted. A local observatory run by
women’s rights organizations reported that
between January and October there had
been 44 gender-based killings of women, 30
of which remained unprosecuted.
Women living in poverty continued to be
the main victims of maternal mortality, and
Nicaragua had one of the highest teenage
pregnancy rates in the Americas region.
Abortion was banned in all circumstances,
even when vital to save the woman’s life.
GRAND INTEROCEANIC CANAL
The proposal to build the Grand Interoceanic
Canal continued to generate controversy, with
civil society organizations reporting a number
of potential human rights violations linked to
the project. According to local organizations,
if built, the Canal would lead to the eviction of
tens of thousands of people and would
directly affect the livelihoods of peasant
farmer communities, Indigenous Peoples
and others.
In April, members of the National Council
for the Defence of the Land, Lake and
National Sovereignty presented the National
Assembly’s First Secretary a citizen-
sponsored bill supported by nearly 7,000
signatories calling for the repeal of the law
273regulating the Canal. Also in April, the
proposal was rejected on grounds of lack of
competence. 1 The issue was referred to the
Supreme Court and a decision was pending
at the end of the year. 2
In February, leaders from affected
Indigenous and Afro-descendant Rama-Kriol
communities brought their case before a
national court. They stated that officials had
pressured communities to give consent to the
project. According to the appeal, 52% of the
Canal’s route would affect Indigenous and
Afro-descendant Rama-Kriol communities. 3
In May, authorities from the RamaKriol
community brought an action before a Court
of Appeal. The communal authorities alleged
that the agreement of prior, free and
informed consent for the implementation of
the Grand Interoceanic Canal had been
signed without an effective consultation
process. In June, the Court of Appeal
declared the petition inadmissible. In July,
community leaders and authorities filed
another appeal with the Supreme Court; a
decision was pending at the end of the year. 4
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Violence flared in the North Atlantic
Autonomous Region. Indigenous Miskitu
Peoples were threatened, attacked, subjected
to sexual violence, killed and forcibly
displaced by non-Indigenous settlers.
Against this background of territorial
conflict and a lack of effective protection
measures from the state, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights granted
precautionary measures in favour of Miskitu
Peoples. In addition, in September the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights ordered the
state to immediately adopt all necessary
measures to end the current violence and
guarantee respect of the right to life, personal
and territorial integrity and cultural identity.
In June, six foreign environmental activists
were detained and expelled from the country.
In the same context, several community
members, who had publicly expressed their
concerns about the Grand Interoceanic
Canal's impact on their livelihoods, were
briefly detained.
In August, the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights granted precautionary
measures in favour of human rights
defenders at the Centre for Justice and
Human Rights of the Atlantic Coast of
Nicaragua. According to the Commission, the
defenders had stated that they had received
death threats because of their work on
Indigenous rights.
In October, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights held a hearing in the case of
Acosta et al. v Nicaragua. According to his
family, Francisco García, who was killed in
2002, was targeted because of his wife's
human rights work as director of the Centre
for Legal Assistance for Indigenous Peoples.
His relatives allege that the state failed to
diligently investigate the attack.
In addition, the Co-ordinator of the
National Council for the Defence of the Land,
Lake and National Sovereignty, reported
intimidation and harassment against her and
her family. She had actively denounced the
potential impact of the Grand Interoceanic
Canal on Nicaraguan peasant farmer
communities.
1. Nicaragua: The state must guarantee the security and integrity of
communities peacefully demonstrating their concerns over
construction of the Canal (AMR 43/3887/2016)
2. Nicaragua: Authorities must listen to those expressing concern over
the Grand Interoceanic Canal (AMR 43/4744/2016)
3. Nicaragua side-lines local communities over multi-billion dollar
canal (News story, 9 February 2016)
4. Nicaragua: El Estado nicaragüense no debe ignorar a las
comunidades indígenas y afrodescendientes que demandan el
respeto a sus derechos (AMR 43/4919/2016)
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In June, a shelter run by the Civil Foundation
for Support to Women Victims of Violence
was raided. There was no evidence of a
serious attempt by the authorities to
investigate the incident.
274
Amnesty International Report 2016/17NIGER
Republic of Niger
Head of state: Mahamadou Issoufou
Head of government: Brigi Rafini
Armed conflict continued, particularly in
the southeastern region of Diffa where most
attacks were carried out by the armed group
Boko Haram. Over 300,000 people needed
humanitarian aid as a result of the conflict
and the continuing state of emergency in
the Diffa region. Over 1,400 suspected
Boko Haram members were in prison, most
held in lengthy pre-trial detention in poor
conditions and at risk of torture. The rights
of refugees and migrants travelling through
Niger were violated.
BACKGROUND
President Issoufou was re-elected in March
after an election that was boycotted by the
main opposition parties. His principal
opponent, Hama Amadou, was in detention
during the election charged with complicity in
kidnapping; he was released shortly after the
election.
Niger was examined under the UN
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process
and accepted almost all of the
recommendations, including those relating to
abolition of the death penalty, protection of
human rights defenders, measures to
eradicate traditional harmful practices such
as early and forced marriage and female
genital mutilation, and guaranteeing the right
to food. Niger rejected one recommendation
on ensuring participation of Indigenous
Peoples in decision-making.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Civilians, including refugees from Nigeria,
continued to be affected by armed conflict,
most of it concentrated in the Diffa region.
The exact number of civilian casualties could
not be determined; the UN estimated that at
least 177 civilians had been killed since
February 2015. Boko Haram carried out
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
more than 50 attacks in the Diffa region in
2016.
Other armed groups were active in western
areas bordering Mali. In October, an
unidentified group attacked the refugee
camp of Tazalit, Tahoua region; and a US aid
worker was abducted in Abalak, Tahoua
region. On 17 October, a group calling itself
Islamic State attacked the high-security
detention centre in Koutoukalé, near Niamey,
Tillabériregion.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
More than 300,000 displaced people needed
humanitarian assistance in the Diffa region
by the end of the year, according to the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA). This included more than
184,000 internally displaced people from
Niger, 29,000 returning Niger nationals and
88,000 Nigerian refugees. Many lived in
harsh conditions in makeshift camps.
Insecurity impeded access to basic
commodities and services, including food,
water and education, and the continuing
state of emergency hampered economic
activity.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Niger hosted more than 60,000 refugees
from Mali in the Tillabériand Tahoua regions,
who also needed assistance.
The number of people transiting through
Niger trying to reach Europe continued to
grow, with Agadez the principal transit hub
for West Africans. In October, a survey by the
International Organization for Migration
reported that 70% of people arriving in Italy
by boat – many of whom had travelled
through Niger – had been a victim of
trafficking or exploitation, including
thousands of women and girls forced into
prostitution in Libya or Europe. Despite an
anti-trafficking law passed in 2015, there was
limited action to prevent trafficking in Niger.
An undetermined number of people died
during dangerous journeys through the
desert in Niger. In June, 14 adults and 20
children were found dead in the desert after
275they left the town of Tahoua aiming to reach
Algeria.
In October, the UN Committee on Migrant
Workers highlighted several concerns,
including forced labour of migrant workers,
including children, particularly as domestic
labour and in the mines.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
More than 1,400 people accused of being
members of Boko Haram remained in
detention, many charged under Niger’s anti-
terror law. Most had been arrested in the
Diffa region since 2013, although some had
been detained since 2012. Among them
were Nigerians, including refugees from
areas affected by Boko Haram. The vast
majority remained held in lengthy pre-trial
detention. In June, the Prosecutor
responsible for terrorism cases said that most
arrests followed denunciations, and that
insecurity and the state of emergency in Diffa
region had prevented effective investigations.
In June, the authorities said that they
planned to extradite to Nigeria all adult
Nigerian detainees to reduce prison
overcrowding and because Nigeria was better
placed to investigate their nationals. The plan
was formally announced in September.
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread in Nigeria, particularly against
people accused of supporting Boko Haram.
The authorities announced that the Code
of Criminal Procedure was to be amended to
extend pre-charge detention in police
custody (garde à vue) from 5 to 15 days,
renewable for a further 15 days.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prison conditions remained poor despite
steps taken to monitor them. The large
number of people arrested for alleged links
with Boko Haram aggravated the problem.
During the year, Koutoukalé detention centre
held more than twice its capacity of 250
detainees, including around 400 Boko
Haram suspects.
276
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The fate of eight people arrested by security
forces in May 2015 remained unclarified. El
Hadj Kannaï Kouliyi, Malam Bandama, Ari
Kannai, Abor Madou, Awa Malloumi, El Hadj
Katchouloumi, Mouché Ali Kou Lawan Dalla
and El Hadji Bara were arrested in N'Guigmi,
Diffa region. The families’ request for
information about their relatives’ whereabouts
were left unanswered.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Some people were prosecuted for exercising
their right to freedom of expression.
In June, Ousmane Moumouni, President
of Action for Democracy and Human Rights
in Niger, was given a six-month suspended
prison sentence for “plotting to change the
constitution” after posting a message on
Facebook about Niger’s security situation
following a Boko Haram attack.
Also in June, journalists Ali Soumana and
Moussa Dodo were handed a three-month
suspended sentence for “putting pressure on
the judiciary”. They had published in Le
Courrier newspaper a list of people accused
of trying to influence a national exam. The list
included influential people such as the
President of the Constitutional Court. The
journalists were prosecuted under the Penal
Code, not the Press Law, which made the
punishment harsher.
NIGERIA
Federal Republic of Nigeria
Head of state and government: Muhammadu Buhari
The conflict between the military and the
armed group Boko Haram continued and
generated a humanitarian crisis that
affected more than 14 million people. The
security forces continued to commit serious
human rights violations including
extrajudicial executions and enforced
disappearances. The police and military
continued to commit torture and other ill-
Amnesty International Report 2016/17treatment. Conditions in military detention
were harsh. Communal violence occurred in
many parts of the country. Thousands of
people were forcibly evicted from their
homes.
ARMED CONFLICT
Boko Haram
Boko Haram continued to commit war crimes
and crimes against humanity in the
northeast, affecting 14.8 million people. The
group continued to carry out attacks and
small-scale raids throughout the year. The
national and regional armed forces
recaptured major towns from Boko Haram’s
control.
In its response to Boko Haram attacks, the
military continued to carry out arbitrary
arrests, detentions, ill-treatment and
extrajudicial executions of people suspected
of being Boko Haram fighters − acts which
amounted to war crimes and possible crimes
against humanity.
In May, 737 men detained as Boko Haram
suspects by the army were transferred to the
prison in Maiduguri, capital of Borno state.
They were charged for being “incorrigible
vagabonds”, which carried up to two years’
imprisonment and/or a fine.
In April, the Defence Ministry started
Operation Safe Corridor to “rehabilitate
repentant and surrendered Boko Haram
fighters” in a camp.
On 13 October, 21 Chibok schoolgirls
abducted in 2014 were released by Boko
Haram fighters following negotiations. One
more girl was found in November; about 195
Chibok schoolgirls remained missing at the
end of the year.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
There remained at least 2 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in northern Nigeria;
80% of them lived in host communities, while
the remainder lived in camps. The camps in
Maiduguri remained overcrowded, with
inadequate access to food, clean water and
sanitation.
In the so-called inaccessible territories in
Borno state, tens of thousands of IDPs were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
held in camps under armed guard by the
Nigerian military and the Civilian Joint Task
Force (CJTF), a state-sponsored civilian
militia formed to fight Boko Haram. Most of
the IDPs were not allowed to leave the camps
and did not receive adequate food, water or
medical care. Thousands of people have died
in these camps due to severe malnutrition. In
June, in a guarded camp in Bama, Borno
state, the NGO Médecins Sans Frontières
reported over 1,200 bodies had been buried
within the past year.
Both the CJTF and the army were accused
of sexually exploiting women in the IDP
camps in exchange for money or food, or for
allowing them to leave the camps.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The military arbitrarily arrested thousands of
young men, women and children who fled to
the safety of recaptured towns, including
Banki and Bama, Borno state. These arrests
were largely based on random profiling of
men, especially young men, rather than on
reasonable suspicion of having committed a
recognizably criminal offence. In most cases,
the arrests were made without adequate
investigation. Other people were arbitrarily
arrested as they attempted to flee from Boko
Haram. Those detained by the military had
no access to their families or lawyers and
were not brought before a court. More than
1,500 detainees were released throughout
the year.
The mass arrests by the military of people
fleeing Boko Haram led to overcrowding in
military detention facilities. At the military
detention facility at Giwa barracks,
Maiduguri, cells were overcrowded. Diseases,
dehydration and starvation was rife. At least
240 detainees died during the year. Bodies
were secretly buried in Maiduguri’s cemetery
by the Borno state environmental protection
agency staff. Among the dead were at least
29 children and babies, aged between
newborn and five years.
At Giwa barracks, children under five were
detained in three overcrowded and insanitary
women’s cells, alongside at least 250 women
277and teenage girls per cell. Some children
were born in detention.
LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY
Their claims were based on a flawed oil spill
investigation led by the oil companies rather
than NOSDRA.
There was continued lack of accountability
for serious human rights violations committed
by security officers. No independent and
impartial investigations into crimes
committed by the military had taken place
despite the President’s repeated promises in
May. Moreover, senior military officials alleged
to have committed crimes under international
law remained uninvestigated; Major General
Ahmadu Mohammed was reinstated into the
army in January. He was in command of
operations when the military executed more
than 640 detainees following a Boko Haram
attack on the detention centre in Giwa
barracks on 14 March 2014.
In its November preliminary report, the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) announced that it will
continue its analysis of any new allegations of
crimes committed in Nigeria and its
assessment of admissibility of the eight
potential cases identified in 2015, in order to
reach a decision on whether the criteria for
opening an investigation are met. Niger Delta
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY The government arrested and detained, some
without trial, at least 10 journalists and
bloggers.
In August, Abubakar Usman, a prominent
blogger, was arrested in Abuja, the capital, by
the anti-corruption agency Economic and
Financial Crimes Commission and accused of
contravening the Cyber Crimes Act. The
Commission did not point out the specific
provisions the blogger had contravened; he
was released without being charged. In
September, Jamil Mabai, was arrested and
detained by the police for posting comments
on Facebook and Twitter that were critical of
the Katsina state government.
In early September, the publisher Emenike
Iroegbu was arrested in Uyo, Akwa Ibom
state, over alleged defamation.
On 5 September, Ahmed Salkida, a
Nigerian journalist based in the United Arab
Emirates, was declared wanted by the
In June, the government launched a
programme to clean up the contamination
caused by oil spills and restore the
environment of the Ogoniland region in the
Niger Delta. There were hundreds of spills
during the year.
The government continued to fail to hold
oil companies to account, including Shell. It
did not provide the oversight needed to
ensure that companies prevented spills, or
responded to oil spills. The National Oil Spill
Detection and Response Agency (NOSDRA)
remained ineffective and certified areas as
clean that remained contaminated.
In March, two Niger Delta communities
affected by oil spills filed a new law suit
against Shell in the UK courts.
Oil companies continued to blame their
failure to prevent spills, or restore
contaminated areas, on sabotage and theft.
278
In January, the armed group Niger Delta
Avengers began attacking and blowing up
pipelines in the Niger Delta region. The
government responded by significantly
increasing military presence in the region.
The activities of Niger Delta Avengers caused
oil production to slow down.
DEATH PENALTY
Three men were secretly executed on 23
December in Benin prison in Edo state. One
of them was sentenced to death by a military
tribunal in 1998, which meant he did not
have a right to appeal. Judges continued to
impose death sentences throughout the year.
On 4 May, the Senate resolved to enact a law
prescribing the death penalty as the
punishment for kidnapping, following the rise
in abductions across the country. A number
of states have either enacted or proposed
similar laws.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
Amnesty International Report 2016/17military and later arrested by the state
security services on arrival in Nigeria. He was
among three people arrested and briefly
detained for alleged links to Boko Haram and
for facilitating the release of a Boko Haram
video on the abducted Chibok girls. He was
later released; his passport remained
confiscated.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The security forces disrupted, in some cases
violently and with excessive use of force,
peaceful protests and assemblies. On 6
September, police stopped members of the
Bring Back Our Girls movement. They had
given notice of the protest and gathered
peacefully outside the office and residence of
the President in Abuja to demand the release
of the abducted Chibok girls.
On 22 September in Abuja, police fired
tear gas canisters to disperse a peaceful
protest by the Islamic Movement in Nigeria,
resulting in some minor injuries.
A number of supporters of Biafran
independence were in detention – many of
them since late January – for attempting to
hold or participate in peaceful assemblies.
On several occasions, security forces used
excessive force against pro-Biafran activists
across southeastern Nigeria.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The military was deployed in 30 out of
Nigeria’s 36 states and in the Federal Capital
Territory of Abuja where they performed
routine policing functions including
responding to non-violent demonstrations.
The military deployment to police public
gatherings contributed to the number of
extrajudicial executions and unlawful killings.
Since January, in response to the continued
agitation by pro-Biafra campaigners, security
forces arbitrarily arrested and killed at least
100 members and supporters of the group
Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB). Some of
those arrested were subjected to enforced
disappearance.
On 9 February, soldiers and police officers
shot at about 200 IPOB members who had
gathered for a prayer meeting at the National
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
High School in Aba, in Abia state. Video
footage showed soldiers shooting at peaceful
and unarmed IPOB members; at least 17
people were killed and scores injured.
On 29 and 30 May, at least 60 people
were killed in a joint security operation
carried out by the army, police, Department
of State Security (DSS) and navy. Pro-Biafra
campaigners had gathered to celebrate
Biafra Remembrance Day in Onitsha. No
investigation into these killings had been
initiated by the end of the year.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 3 April, Chijioke Mba was arrested and
detained by the anti-kidnapping unit of the
police force in Enugu for belonging to an
unlawful society. His family and lawyer had
not seen him since May.
On 16 August, Sunday Chucks Obasi was
abducted from his home in Amuko Nnewi,
Anambra state, by five armed men suspected
to be Nigerian security agents in a vehicle
with a government registration number plate.
Witnesses said he was injured during the
incident. His whereabouts remained
unknown.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The police and military continued to commit
torture and other ill-treatment during the
interrogation of suspects or detainees to
extract information and confessions. The
Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS) of the
police frequently committed torture and other
ill-treatment during interrogations.
In September, the Inspector General of the
police warned SARS against committing
torture and encouraged them to follow due
process of law.
On 18 May, Chibuike Edu died in police
custody after he was arrested for burglary
and detained for two weeks by the SARS in
Enugu. The police authorities were
investigating the incident; no one had been
held accountable for his death at the end of
the year.
The National Assembly was yet to pass
into law the anti-torture bill which seeks to
further prohibit and criminalize torture. In
279June, it passed its first reading in the Senate.
It had earlier been passed by the House of
Representatives and was revised by the
Nigeria Law Reform Commission. The revised
version was to be debated at the Senate.
COMMUNAL VIOLENCE
Inter-communal violence occurred in many
parts of the country. Many incidents were
linked to lingering clashes between
herdsmen and farming communities.
In February, at least 45 people were killed
in Agatu, Benue state, after attacks by
suspected herdsmen. In April, at least nine
people were killed by suspected herdsmen in
the Nimbo/Ukpabi community in Enugu
state. The community said they had warned
the authorities about the pending attack but
the security agencies failed to prevent it. Five
people detained by the police over the killings
were yet to be tried.
In May, at least two people were killed in
the Oke-Ako community, Ekiti state, by
suspected herdsmen. In response, in August,
the state government enacted a law banning
cattle on undesignated land in the state.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Ibrahim El-Zakzaky, leader of the Islamic
Movement of Nigeria (IMN), remained in
incommunicado detention without trial since
his arrest in December 2015. Between 12
and 14 December 2015, soldiers killed more
than 350 protesters and supporters of IMN at
two sites in Zaria, Kaduna state.
Hundreds of IMN members were arrested
and continued to be held in detention
facilities in Kaduna, Bauchi, Plateau and
Kano states.
On 11 April, the Kaduna state authorities
admitted to a Judicial Commission of Inquiry
that they had secretly buried 347 bodies in a
mass grave two days after the December
2015 massacre.
On 15 July, the Commission presented its
report to the state government indicting the
Nigerian military for unlawful killings. In
December, the Kaduna state government
published its white paper on the report,
280
which rejected most of the Commission’s
recommendations.
On 22 September, the National Human
Rights Commission released a report
indicting the IMN for provoking the clashes
that led to the killings of IMN members and
the military for the killings of IMN members.
On the same day, police blocked IMN
protesters and fired tear gas canisters at
members of the IMN during a protest to
demand the release of their leader. On 6
October, the Governor of Kaduna state
declared the IMN an unlawful society.
Following the declaration, members of the
IMN were violently attacked in several states
across the country, including Kaduna, Kano,
Katsina and Plateau. Several IMN members
were also arrested and detained by the
military.
HOUSING RIGHTS
Forced evictions of thousands of people from
their homes impacting on a range of their
rights occurred in at least two states and in
the Federal Capital Territory of Abuja.
In February, a Tribunal of Inquiry set up by
the Lagos state government found that the
government had failed to genuinely and
adequately consult, compensate and provide
promised resettlement to agricultural
communities who were forcibly evicted from
their homes and farmlands between 2006
and January 2016.
Between 2 and 5 July, the Rivers state
government forcibly evicted over 1,600
residents in Eagle Island claiming that this
was to tackle crime.
Following earlier forced evictions in March
and September, on 9 October the Governor of
Lagos state announced plans to commence
the demolition of all settlements along the
state’s waterfronts. The justification was the
need to respond to kidnapping incidents in
the state. There were no plans announced to
consult the communities prior to eviction.
On 15 October, hundreds of residents in
Ilubirin waterfront community were forcibly
evicted from their homes. Between 9 and 10
November, over 30,000 residents of Otodo
Gbame, a waterfront community in Lagos
Amnesty International Report 2016/17state, were forcibly evicted when state
authorities set fire to and demolished their
homes with a bulldozer. On 11 November,
hundreds of residents were forcibly evicted
from another nearby waterfront community,
Ebute Ikate, in Lagos state.
NORWAY restrict access to asylum. This was in line
with the Minister of Immigration and
Integration’s aim of ensuring that Norway had
“the strictest refugee policy in Europe”. The
proposals included granting police at the
border – rather than the Immigration
Directorate and the Immigration Appeal
Board – the power to assess whether a
person is in need of international protection.
They also included severe restrictions on the
right to family reunification and the rights of
asylum-seeking children. The most restrictive
elements of the proposed legislation did not
pass; but the package approved by
Parliament in June, which began to be
implemented in August, marked a significant
retrogression on Norway’s approach to
international protection. The new provisions
included a requirement for refugees applying
for permanent residency to demonstrate
economic self-sufficiency for 12 months and
a “crisis mechanism” allowing expulsions at
the border when faced with large numbers of
arriving asylum-seekers. As of August, 84
children in families whose claims for asylum
had been rejected were detained together
with their adult family members at the
Trandum police immigration detention centre
near Oslo Airport Gardermoen, pending
return to their country of origin.
In early December, 40 young male Afghan
nationals, some of whom claimed to be under
18, were returned to Afghanistan as part of
the government’s policy to return Afghan
asylum-seekers.
Kingdom of Norway
Head of state: King Harald V
Head of government: Erna Solberg RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In September, the Gender and Equal
Opportunities Bill to eliminate all forms of
discrimination against women passed its
second reading in the Senate. Although
Nigeria ratified the CEDAW in 1985, it was yet
to domesticate the Convention as part of the
national law.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
The law prohibiting samesex marriages
remained in force. Police continued to arrest
LGBTI people. Men perceived to be gay were
attacked by mobs and were blackmailed and
targeted for extortion.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In May, Bayelsa state passed the Child Rights
Law bringing to 23 the number of states that
have enacted the law. In addition, the State
House of Assembly in Enugu state passed
the law in August; the Governor was yet to
give his assent.
The Immigration Law was amended to
introduce significant restrictions on access
to asylum. A new law granting transgender
people the right to legal gender recognition
was passed. Serious concerns remained
about rape and other violence against
women.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In April, the government tabled 40
amendments to the Immigration Law to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
In June, Parliament adopted a new law on
legal gender recognition, granting
transgender people aged 16 or older the right
to legal gender recognition on the basis of
self-identification. Children aged between six
and 16 can apply for legal gender recognition
with the consent of their parents or
guardians. Violence motivated by
discriminatory attitudes towards transgender
people was still not classified as a hate crime
in the Penal Code.
281DISCRIMINATION – SEX WORKERS
While selling sex was not illegal, sex workers
remained subject to a high level of policing
and penalization. Sex workers faced human
rights abuses such as physical and sexual
violence including rape, exploitation and
harassment, and risked facing penalization if
they engaged with police. The enforcement of
sex work, public nuisance and immigration
laws to disrupt and prohibit sex work led to
sex workers being subjected to forced
eviction, police surveillance, fines,
discrimination, loss of livelihood and
deportation. 1
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Rape and other sexual violence against
women and girls remains endemic. The legal
definition of rape in the Penal Code was not
consent-based. Serious concerns remained
about attrition rates in rape investigations and
prosecutions, and in the lack of gender
sensitivity among lay judges in hearing rape
cases. There was systemic failure to ensure
women’s rights to legal protection and
equality before the law. The number of rapes
reported to police increased by 12% from
2014 to 2015, according to police statistics
published in May.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
On 24 June the Ministry of Justice ruled that
a 43-year-old Rwandan national accused of
complicity in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda,
whose appeal rights were exhausted, could
be extradited to Rwanda. The extradition had
not been carried out by the end of the year.
1. The human cost of ‘crushing’ the market: Criminalization of sex work
in Norway (EUR 36/4034/2016)
OMAN
Sultanate of Oman
Head of state and government: Sultan Qaboos bin Said
Al Said
282
The authorities continued to restrict
freedoms of expression and association,
arresting and detaining government critics
and human rights activists. Most were
released within days but some faced
prosecution and imprisonment, creating an
environment of self-censorship. Women
remained subject to discrimination in law
and in practice. Migrant workers were
exposed to exploitation and abuse. The
death penalty remained in force; no
executions were reported.
BACKGROUND
Oman accepted a number of
recommendations following the UN
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Oman’s
human rights record in 2015, but it rejected
others, including abolition of the death
penalty and bringing freedoms of expression
and assembly in line with international
standards.
In March, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child urged Oman to cease
harassment of human right defenders
engaged in children’s rights and to allow
Omani women to pass on their nationality to
their children on an equal basis with Omani
men.
In June, the UN CERD Committee
expressed concern about government
restrictions on NGOs, racial discrimination
and migrant workers’ rights.
The government enacted a new Penal
Code in April as well as laws prohibiting
money laundering and financing terrorism.
In January, the authorities accepted the
transfer of 10 detainees, all Yemeni nationals,
from the US detention centre at
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
The authorities restricted freedoms of
expression and association. State Security
personnel arrested and detained online and
print journalists, bloggers and others. Most
were interrogated and then released without
charge after several days but at least eight
individuals were sentenced to prison terms
Amnesty International Report 2016/17under vaguely worded public order, insult or
national security provisions, for the peaceful
expression of their opinions.
Those sentenced included Hassan al-
Basham, a former diplomat, sentenced in
February to three years’ imprisonment for
Facebook posts the authorities said insulted
God and the Sultan; Naser al-Busaidi, whose
one-year prison sentence for criticizing
officials was confirmed by the Nizwa Court of
Appeal in February; and Sayyid Abdullah al-
Darouri, whose 18-month sentence on
sedition and public order charges imposed in
2015 was reduced to six months in February.
In May the authorities released former
parliamentarian Talib al-Ma’mari after the
Sultan issued a pardon. He was serving a
four-year prison sentence imposed after an
unfair trial in 2014 in connection with a
demonstration to protect the environment.
In August, the authorities released Saeed
Jaddad, a blogger and prisoner of conscience
imprisoned following his convictions in
September and November 2015. 1
In August, the authorities closed down
Azamn newspaper and arrested and
prosecuted the editor and two of its
journalists after it published articles alleging
corruption by the government and the
judiciary. Ibrahim al-Ma’mari, Azamn’s editor,
faced four charges, local news editor Zaher
al-‘Abri faced one charge and deputy editor
Yousef al-Haj faced six charges. Internal
Security Service officers arrested another
journalist, Hamoud al-Shukaily, for Facebook
posts criticizing the action taken against the
Azamn journalists. In December an appeal
court overturned the ban on the newspaper,
acquitted Zaher al-‘Abri, and reduced the
sentences handed down to Ibrahim al-
Ma’mari and Yousef al-Haj.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women faced discrimination in law and in
practice, being accorded lesser rights than
men in both criminal law and in personal
status or family law in relation to matters
such as divorce, child custody, inheritance
and passing their nationality on to their
children.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers faced exploitation and
abuse. Domestic workers, mainly women
from Asia and Africa, complained that
employers to whom they were tied under the
official kafala sponsorship system confiscated
their passports, forced them to work
excessive hours without time off, and denied
them their full wages and adequate food and
living conditions. The kafala system does not
provide domestic workers with the
protections available under the Labour Law.
They remained vulnerable to abuse in the
confines of private homes.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for a
range of crimes. Amendments to the Penal
Code confirmed the use of firing squad as the
method of execution. No executions were
reported.
1. Oman: Further information: Omani prisoner of conscience released:
Saeed Jaddad (MDE 20/4758/2016)
PAKISTAN
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Head of state: Mamnoon Hussain
Head of government: Muhammad Nawaz Sharif
Armed groups continued to carry out
targeted attacks against civilians, including
government employees, which resulted in
hundreds of casualties. Security forces,
particularly paramilitary Rangers in Karachi,
committed human rights violations with
almost total impunity. Executions
continued, often after unfair trials. State
and non-state actors discriminated against
religious minorities. Despite a new law in
Punjab to protect women from violence, so-
called “honour” crimes continued to be
reported. Human rights defenders and
media workers experienced threats,
harassment and abuse from security forces
and armed groups. Minorities continued to
283face discrimination across a range of
economic and social rights. Access to
quality health care, particularly for poor and
rural women, remained limited.
BACKGROUND
Operation Zarb-e-Azb, the Pakistan military’s
offensive against non-state armed groups that
started in June 2014, continued in North
Waziristan and Khyber tribal agency.
Significant levels of armed conflict and
political violence continued, in particular in
the provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA),
Balochistan and Sindh.
The National Commission for Human
Rights, set up in May 2015, continued to lack
sufficient staff and other resources, despite
its budget finally being approved by
Parliament. Concerns remained about the
Commission’s limited mandate with regard to
investigation of cases of human rights
violations allegedly committed by state
agencies.
In late September, cross-border tension
between Pakistan and India increased, with
both states accusing the other of human
rights violations at the UN Human Rights
Council. There were repeated violations by
both sides of the 2003 ceasefire, with
exchange of fire across the Line of Control.
India claimed to have carried out “surgical
strikes” on militants in Pakistani-
administered Azad Kashmir, which Pakistan
denied.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups continued to carry out attacks,
despite a government-mandated National
Action Plan to counter terrorism. The Plan
was implemented in the wake of a Taliban
attack on an army school in Peshawar in
December 2014 that killed at least 149
people, mostly children.
On 20 January, armed attackers killed at
least 30 people, mostly students and
teachers, in Bacha Khan University,
Charsadda, northwest Pakistan.
Responsibility was claimed by a Pakistani
Taliban commander who allegedly planned
284
the 2014 army school attack in Peshawar,
but this claim was contested. 1 The army
subsequently claimed to have apprehended
five “facilitators” of the attack.
On 16 March, a bomb attack on a bus
carrying government employees in Peshawar
killed at least 15 people and severely injured
25. 2
On 8 August, a suicide bomb attack killed
at least 63 people, mostly lawyers, and
wounded more than 50 others at the Civil
Hospital in Quetta, south-west Pakistan.
Mourners had gathered to accompany the
body of Bilal Anwar Kasi, President of the
Balochistan Bar Association, who had been
killed by gunmen earlier that day. 3
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Security forces including the Rangers, a
paramilitary force under the command of the
Pakistan Army, perpetrated human rights
violations such as arbitrary arrests, torture
and other ill-treatment, and extrajudicial
executions. Security laws and practices, and
the absence of any independent mechanisms
to investigate the security forces and hold
them accountable, allowed government
forces to commit such violations with near-
total impunity. Victims included members of
political parties, in particular the Muttahida
Qaumi Movement (MQM), and human rights
defenders.
On 1 May, plainclothes police arrested
Aftab Ahmed, a senior MQM member. On 3
May, after he was moved to Rangers custody,
news of his death emerged, alongside
photographs apparently showing wounds
sustained during torture. 4 The Director-
General of the Rangers for Sindh publicly
acknowledged that Aftab Ahmed had been
tortured in custody, but denied that his forces
were responsible for the death. According to
media reports, five Rangers soldiers were
suspended after an investigation ordered by
the Chief of Army Staff, but no further
information was made public.
By the end of the year little progress had
been made in the case of Dr Asim Hussain, a
senior member of the Pakistan People’s Party
and a former federal minister who was
Amnesty International Report 2016/17allegedly ill-treated and denied proper
medical attention while in the custody of the
Rangers in 2015. Asim Hussain had been
arrested on charges including for “being
involved in offences relating to
misappropriation of funds and for enhancing,
supporting terrorism activities, and other
criminal links/activities by using authority
punishable under the Anti-Terrorism Act
1997”.
Security forces detained several political
activists without trial during the year. Some of
them continued to be at risk of torture and
other ill-treatment.
According to information published in
August by the Pakistan Commission of
Inquiry on Enforced Disappearances, 1,401
out of more than 3,000 cases of
disappearance had not yet been investigated
by the Commission.
DEATH PENALTY
Since the December 2014 lifting of a six-year
moratorium on executions, more than 400
have been carried out. Some of those
executed were juveniles at the time of the
offence or had a mental disability.
Both civil and military courts imposed
death sentences, in many cases after unfair
trials. Contrary to international law, the 28
offences carrying the death penalty included
non-lethal crimes.
MILITARY COURTS
Military courts were given jurisdiction in 2015
to try all those accused of terrorism-related
offences, including civilians. By January
2016, the government had constituted 11
military courts to hear such cases.
In August, the Supreme Court ruled for the
first time on cases from these courts,
upholding the verdicts and death sentences
imposed on 16 civilians. The Court ruled that
the appellants had not proved that the
military violated their constitutional rights or
failed to follow procedure. According to
lawyers, the accused were denied access to
legal counsel of their choice, and to military
court records when preparing their appeals.
Some of the accused were allegedly
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
subjected to enforced disappearance, torture
and other ill-treatment, and at least two were
reportedly under 18 when arrested.
DISCRIMINATION – RELIGIOUS
MINORITIES
State and non-state actors continued to
discriminate against religious minorities, both
Muslim and non-Muslim, in law and practice.
Blasphemy laws remained in force and
several new cases were registered, mostly in
Punjab. The laws violated the rights to
freedom of expression, thought, conscience
and religion. Minorities, particularly Ahmadis,
Hazaras and Dalits, continued to face
restricted access to employment, health care,
education and other basic services.
Mumtaz Qadri, a security guard convicted
of killing the Governor of Punjab in 2011
because he had criticized the blasphemy
laws, was executed in February. His funeral
was attended by thousands of people and
was followed by protests in the capital,
Islamabad, Lahore and Karachi where
protesters damaged public property, attacked
media stations and clashed with the police.
Asia Noreen, a Christian woman
sentenced to death for blasphemy in 2010,
remained imprisoned in Sheikhupura. On 13
October, the Supreme Court was scheduled
to hear her case in the ultimate stage of her
appeal process but adjourned it indefinitely.
Armed groups attacked a park in Lahore
on 27 March, killing at least 70 people, many
of them children, and injuring many more. A
faction of the Pakistani Taliban, Jamaat-ul-
Ahrar, claimed responsibility for the attack,
saying they had targeted Christians
celebrating Easter.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan
recorded almost 3,000 cases of violence
against women and girls, including murder,
rape and gang rape, sodomy, domestic
violence and kidnappings.
The Punjab Protection of Women against
Violence Act was passed by the Punjab
Provincial Assembly in February, despite
opposition from Islamic parties.
285An amendment to the law on so-called
“honour-based” killings was introduced to
end impunity for such crimes, but allowed for
the death penalty as a possible punishment
and for perpetrators to have their sentences
lessened if they secure a pardon from the
victim’s family. It remained unclear how the
authorities will distinguish between an
“honour killing” and other murders, or what
standards of evidence would apply, or what
penalties would ensue. Human rights NGOs
and activists were concerned that the penalty
imposed should not depend on whether or
not the victim’s family had pardoned the
crime. According to the Human Rights
Commission of Pakistan, around 512 women
and girls, and 156 men and boys, were killed
in 2016 by relatives on so-called “honour”
grounds. As many cases went unreported, or
were falsely described as suicides or natural
deaths, the actual number was almost
certainly much higher. Qandeel Baloch, a
social media celebrity, was drugged and
killed by her brother in July. He confessed to
murdering her for “dishonouring the Baloch
name”.
Child marriage remained a concern. In
January a bill to raise the legal minimum age
of marriage to 18 for girls was withdrawn
following pressure from the Council of Islamic
Ideology, who considered it “un-Islamic and
blasphemous”.
RIGHT TO HEALTH – WOMEN AND GIRLS
Access to quality health care, particularly for
poor and rural women, remained limited due
to information, distance and cost barriers, as
well as to perceived norms concerning
women’s health and wellbeing.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
Media workers continued to be harassed,
abducted and sometimes murdered. Those
in FATA and Balochistan and those working
on national security issues were particularly
at risk.
According to the Pakistani Press
Foundation, as of October, at least two media
workers were killed, 16 were injured and one
286
was abducted in connection with their work.
The authorities generally failed to provide
adequate protection to media workers from
attacks by non-state armed groups, security
forces, political activists and religious groups.
Of the 49 media workers murdered since
2001, only four caseshad resulted in a
conviction by the end of 2016. In March, a
man convicted of murdering journalist Ayub
Khattak in 2013 was sentenced to life
imprisonment and a fine.
Zeenat Shahzadi, a journalist abducted by
gunmen in August 2015 in Lahore, remained
forcibly disappeared. The Human Rights
Commission of Pakistan believed she had
been abducted by security forces. In October
Cyril Almeida, assistant editor of Dawn
newspaper, was placed briefly on the Exit
Control List, which prohibits certain people
from leaving Pakistan. The Prime Minister’s
Office had objected to an article he wrote on
tensions between the civilian government and
the military. A few weeks later the authorities
held the Minister for Information responsible
for leaking the information that led to Cyril
Almeida’s news report.
The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory
Authority, the federal regulator of the
broadcast media, restricted media outputs by
issuing fines, threatening to cancel
broadcasting licences, and, in some cases,
threatening prosecutions. Self-censorship
was routine as a result of these measures
and because of the fear of reprisals from the
intelligence agencies and armed groups.
A new law on cybercrimes – the
Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act – was
passed in August, giving the authorities broad
powers to surveil citizens and censor online
expression. There were fears that it posed a
risk to the right to freedom of expression, as
well as the right to privacy and access
to information.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
State and non-state actors continue to
harass, threaten, detain and kill human rights
defenders, especially in Balochistan, FATA
and Karachi.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17On 8 May, the Pakistani Taliban shot dead
prominent human rights activist and website
editor Khurram Zaki in Karachi. A spokesman
for a faction of the Pakistani Taliban said it
had killed him because of his campaign
against Abdul Aziz, a cleric of the Red
Mosque in Islamabad.
On 16 January, Rangers personnel
arrested human rights defender Saeed
Baloch, an advocate for fishing communities,
in Karachi. Following national and
international pressure, he was presented in
court on 26 January and released on bail
in August.
According to eyewitnesses, human rights
defender Wahid Baloch was abducted on 26
July by masked men in plain clothes,
believed to be representatives of security
forces in Karachi. 5 He was released on
5 December.
A policy was implemented from early 2016
requiring international NGOs to obtain
government consent to raise funds and
operate. In an increasingly hostile climate for
human rights work, security forces harassed
and intimidated several NGO staff.
In September, the Home Ministry shut
down Taangh Wasaib, an NGO working for
women’s rights and against religious
intolerance, stating that it was involved in
“dubious activities”.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The legal status of the 1.4 million registered
Afghan refugees became increasingly
precarious as hostility towards them
intensified and abuses, including physical
attacks, escalated. The authorities estimated
that an additional 1 million unregistered
Afghan refugees were also living in the
country.
Senior Pakistani officials threatened to
expedite the forced return of all Afghan
refugees. On 29 June, the authorities
extended the right of registered refugees to
remain in Pakistan legally, but only until
March 2017.
Following the December 2014 attack on
the army public school in Peshawar, police
targeted Afghan settlements, demolished
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
their homes, and subjected refugees to
arbitrary detention and harassment.
WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Despite the Bonded Labour System
(Abolition) Act of 1992, bonded labour
practices continued, particularly in the brick
kiln and textile industries and among the
scheduled castes (Dalits).
1. Pakistan: Armed attack on Bacha Khan University a potential war
crime (News story, 20 January)
2. Pakistan: Government must deliver justice for victims of Peshawar
bus bombing (News story, 16 March)
3. Pakistan: Attack on Quetta hospital abhorrent disregard for the
sanctity of life (News story, 8 August)
4. Pakistan: Investigation crucial after Karachi political activist tortured
and killed in custody (News story, 4 May)
5. Pakistan: Human rights defender at risk of torture (ASA
33/4580/2016)
PALESTINE
(STATE OF)
State of Palestine
Head of state: Mahmoud Abbas
Head of government: Rami Hamdallah
The Palestinian authorities in the West
Bank and the Hamas de facto
administration in the Gaza Strip both
continued to restrict freedom of expression,
including by arresting and detaining critics
and political opponents. They also
restricted the right to peaceful assembly
and used excessive force to disperse some
protests. Torture and other ill-treatment of
detainees remained rife in both Gaza and
the West Bank. Unfair trials of civilians
before military courts continued in Gaza;
detainees were held without charge or trial
in the West Bank. Women and girls faced
discrimination and violence. Courts in Gaza
continued to hand down death sentences
and Hamas carried out executions; no death
sentences were imposed or executions
carried out in the West Bank.
287BACKGROUND
Negotiations between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, which was led by
President Abbas, remained stalled despite
international efforts to revive them. Continued
tension between Fatah and Hamas
undermined the Palestinian national
consensus government formed in June 2014;
the Hamas de facto administration continued
to control Gaza.
Gaza remained under an Israeli air, sea
and land blockade, in force since June 2007.
The continuing restrictions on imports of
construction materials under the blockade,
and funding shortages, contributed to severe
delays in reconstruction of homes and other
infrastructure damaged or destroyed in
recent armed conflicts. Continuing
restrictions on exports crippled the economy
and exacerbated widespread impoverishment
among Gaza’s 1.9 million inhabitants. The
Egyptian authorities’ almost total closure of
the Rafah border crossing with Gaza
completed its isolation and compounded the
impact of the Israeli blockade.
In June, Prime Minister Hamdallah said
new municipal elections would be held on 8
October. However, the Palestinian High Court
ruled in September that the elections should
be indefinitely suspended on the grounds
that Israeli controls prevented the
participation of Palestinians in East
Jerusalem and due to the illegality of local
courts in Gaza. Both Palestinian authorities
harassed and detained opposition candidates
in the period before the court’s decision.
There was a marked rise in tension in
Nablus, Jenin and other northern
governorates of the West Bank where
gunmen affiliated to Fatah clashed with the
security forces resulting in some deaths.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In February, President Abbas signed the
juvenile protection bill into law, paving the
way for the establishment in March of the
West Bank’s first juvenile court in Ramallah.
288
In March President Abbas approved the
National Insurance Law establishing for the
first time a state social security system for
private sector workers and their families. The
new law covered issues such as pensions for
the elderly and the disabled, and
employment injury benefits for workers in the
Palestinian private sector. Civil society
organizations criticized the new law, arguing
that it failed to provide minimum standards of
protection and social justice and could cause
further marginalization of the most
vulnerable.
In April a presidential decree established a
nine-judge Palestinian Supreme
Constitutional Court with supremacy over
other Palestinian courts, a move seen widely
as an unprecedented example of executive
interference in the judiciary. In October, the
President of the High Judicial Council was
removed from his position. He stated in a
media interview that he had been forced to
sign his resignation at the time of his
inauguration.
In December, the President stripped five
members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council of their immunity, including his
political opponents, after a judgment by the
Supreme Constitutional Court allowing him to
do so. The move was criticized by civil society
organizations as undermining the rule of law
and separation of powers.
Palestine ratified the Kampala
amendments to the Rome Statute on the
crime of aggression in June. Representatives
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court visited Israel and
the West Bank but did not travel to Gaza.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Security authorities in the West Bank,
including Preventative Security and General
Intelligence, and those in Gaza, particularly
the Internal Security Service, arbitrarily
arrested and detained critics and supporters
of rival political organizations. In the West
Bank, security forces used administrative
detention by order of governors to hold
detainees without charge or trial for
periods of up to several months.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17UNFAIR TRIALS
In both the West Bank and Gaza, authorities
failed to ensure adherence to basic due
process rights, such as prompt access to
legal counsel and the right to be charged or
released. Palestinian security forces in the
West Bank held detainees for long periods
without trial on the orders of regional
governors, and delayed or failed to comply
with court orders for the release of detainees
in dozens of cases. In Gaza, Hamas military
courts continued to convict defendants,
including civilians, in unfair trials, sentencing
some to death.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees
remained common and was committed with
impunity by Palestinian police and other
security forces in the West Bank, and Hamas
police and other security forces in Gaza. In
both areas, the victims included children.
The Independent Commission for Human
Rights, Palestine’s national human rights
institution, reported receiving a total of 398
allegations of torture and other ill-treatment of
detainees between January and November;
163 from the West Bank and 235 from Gaza.
The majority of complaints in both areas were
against police. Neither the Palestine national
consensus government nor the Hamas de
facto administration in Gaza independently
investigated torture allegations or held
perpetrators to account.
Basel al-Araj, Ali Dar al-Sheikh and three
other men alleged that General Intelligence
officers held them incommunicado and
tortured and otherwise ill-treated them for
almost three weeks following their arrest on 9
April. They said officers beat them, forced
them to remain in stress positions, and
deprived them of sleep, leading them to
launch a hunger strike protest on 28 August.
Officers then subjected them to solitary
confinement for the duration of their hunger
strikes. They were released on bail and
appeared before the Ramallah Magistrates’
Court on 8 September on charges that
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
included illegal possession of arms. Their trial
was ongoing at the end of the year.
Ahmad Izzat Halaweh died in Jeneid
prison in Nablus on 23 August shortly after
being arrested. A national consensus
government spokesperson said security
officials had severely beaten Ahmad Halaweh
prior to his death. The authorities began an
investigation headed by the Minister of
Justice. The investigation was continuing at
the end of the year.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities in both the West Bank and
Gaza severely curtailed rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly, harassing, arresting and detaining
critics and supporters of their political rivals
and forcibly dispersing protests, assaulting
journalists and others.
In the West Bank, police arrested
university professor Abd al-Sattar Qassem in
February after he criticized the Palestinian
authorities on al-Quds TV, a Hamas-affiliated
broadcaster. He was charged with incitement
and released on bail after five days in
custody.
In Gaza, Internal Security Service officers
briefly detained journalist Mohamed Ahmed
Othman in September. He reported being
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment in
an attempt to force him to reveal the source
for a government document he had
published. He was released the next day
without charge. He was summoned again
twice in the two days following his release.
In February, a two-day walkout by West
Bank teachers complaining about low pay
escalated into several weeks of mass strikes
and protests following heavy-handed
intervention by Palestinian security forces,
who set up roadblocks around Ramallah to
prevent teachers joining demonstrations and
arrested 22 teachers. Those arrested were
subsequently released without charge.
Harassment of teachers continued at the end
of the year, targeting those organizing a new
union.
289UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Security forces in the West Bank killed at
least three men and injured others while
carrying out law enforcement activities.
On 7 June, Adel Nasser Jaradat was killed
by gunfire from West Bank security forces in
Silet al-Harethiya, a village northwest of
Jenin. The authorities failed to hold those
responsible to account.
On 19 August, security forces killed Fares
Halawa and Khaled al-Aghbar in Nablus in
unclear circumstances. Though the local
authorities maintained they were killed in
clashes, witnesses said they were alive and
unarmed when the security forces seized
them. An investigation was continuing at the
end of the year.
In Gaza, the military wing of Hamas, the
‘Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, summarily
executed one of their members, Mahmoud
Rushdi Ishteiwi, on 7 February after the
group said its “Military and Shari’a
Judiciaries” had sentenced him for
“behavioural and moral excesses”. The
victim’s family said he had been detained
incommunicado by the Brigades since 21
January 2015. The Hamas de facto
administration in Gaza took no steps to
investigate or bring the perpetrators of the
killing to justice.
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS' RIGHTS
Women and girls continued to face
discrimination in law and in practice, and
were inadequately protected against sexual
and other violence, including so-called
“honour” killings. Women and girls were
reported to have been killed by male relatives
in “honour” killings.
In February the Attorney General issued a
decision establishing a specialized
prosecution unit to investigate and prosecute
cases of family violence and violence against
women.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for
murder and other crimes. Courts in the West
290
Bank did not hand down any death
sentences during the year.
In May, members of the Change and
Reform Bloc, the Hamas parliamentary group
in Gaza, paved the way for the Gaza
authorities to execute prisoners whose
sentences have not been ratified by the
Palestinian President, contrary to the
Palestinian Basic Law of 2003 and the 2001
Penal Procedure Law.
PAPUA NEW
GUINEA
Independent State of Papua New Guinea
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II, represented by
Michael Ogio
Head of government: Peter Charles Paire O’Neill
The authorities failed to prevent widespread
violence against children, women, sex
workers, asylum-seekers and refugees.
Cases of violence were rarely prosecuted.
Cultural practices, including polygamy,
continued to undermine women’s rights.
There was insufficient protection against
torture or other ill-treatment. The police
continued to use excessive force against
protesters. Poverty remained endemic,
particularly in rural areas, despite economic
wealth generated by the mining industry.
The death penalty was retained; no
executions had been carried out since
1954.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Weeks of peaceful protests by students at the
University of Papua New Guinea against
alleged government corruption ended in
violence on 8 June, when police fired shots
and assaulted peaceful protesters. Thirty-
eight people were injured and received
medical treatment, including two who
suffered gunshot wounds. Although separate
investigations were initiated by the police, the
Ombudsman and a parliamentary committee,
Amnesty International Report 2016/17the outcomes were not known at the end of
the year.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The government failed to address widespread
sexual and gender-based violence in
legislation or in practice. Cultural practices
were allowed to persist, including the custom
whereby wives are forced to repay a “bride
price” to their husbands if they wish to
separate from him, placing women in abusive
marriages at greater risk. Women accused of
“sorcery” were subjected to violence from the
community.
There was also limited psychosocial
support, women’s shelters or other services to
protect women from domestic violence.
DISCRIMINATION – SEX WORKERS
There were high levels of violence by state
and non-state actors against sex workers on
grounds of their gender identity, sexual
orientation or status as sex workers and as a
result of legislation criminalizing sex work. 1
Systemic gender inequality and
discrimination in education, employment and
in the community generally, forced many
women, including transgender women, and
gay men into selling sex for a living. Police
officers were responsible for violations against
sex workers, such as rape, physical assault,
arbitrary arrest and detention and other ill-
treatment. The criminalization of same-sex
sexual relations as well as of sex work
continued to drive and compound violence
and discrimination against gay and
transgender people. It also led to
discrimination in the provision of health care
and undermined the prevention and
treatment of HIV.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
As of 30 November, around 900 refugees
and asylum-seekers, all men, remained in
two Australian-run detention centres on
Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island (see
Australia entry). In April, the Supreme Court
held that their detention − for over three
years − was illegal and unconstitutional. It
ordered the Australian and Papua New
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Guinean governments to close the camps
immediately. Both camps remained open at
the end of the year.
Refugees and asylum-seekers filed a civil
court case seeking orders to force the camps’
closure; for them to be returned to Australia;
and for compensation for their unlawful
detention.
A Sudanese refugee, Faysal Ishak Ahmed,
died on 24 December, after being airlifted
from one of the detention centres, to an
Australian hospital, after a fall and a seizure.
Refugees in the centre said his health had
deteriorated over months but he
was not given adequate health care.
There were continued reports of violence
against refugees and asylum-seekers for
which the perpetrators were rarely held to
account. In April, two Papua New Guinean
nationals employed in one of the detention
centres were convicted of murdering asylum-
seeker Reza Berat in 2014 although others
allegedly involved were not prosecuted.
In November, the Australian government
announced that some of the refugees
detained on Nauru (see Nauru entry) and
Manus Island would be resettled in the USA.
1. Outlawed and abused: Criminalizing sex work in Papua New Guinea
(ASA 34/4030/2016)
PARAGUAY
Republic of Paraguay
Head of state and government: Horacio Manuel Cartes
Jara
Figures on poverty reduction improved,
although children and adolescents
continued to be those principally affected.
Indigenous Peoples continued to be denied
their rights to land and to free, prior and
informed consent on projects affecting
them. Both Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
Paraguayans faced racial discrimination. A
bill to eliminate all forms of discrimination
was pending approval at the end of the year.
There were reports of violations of freedom
291of expression and of the persecution of
human rights defenders and journalists.
Abortion remained criminalized and child
and teenage pregnancies continued to be
a concern.
BACKGROUND
In October a new Ombudsman was
appointed after a gap of seven years.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
In January, Paraguay’s human rights record
was examined under the UN Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) process. The Human
Rights Council made a number of
recommendations, including urging Paraguay
to approve a bill to eliminate all forms of
discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity; to develop
legal systems to prevent and punish violence
against women and girls; to reinforce
protection of the rights of Indigenous
Peoples; to protect the free exercise of
freedom of the press, expression and
opinion; and to address impunity for human
rights violations committed against human
rights defenders and journalists. Paraguay
accepted all the recommendations except
those related to the decriminalization of
abortion.
In October the UN CERD Committee
issued its report and concluding observation
based on Paraguay’s fourth to sixth periodic
reports. It made a number of
recommendations, including urging Paraguay
to take affirmative action to overcome
systemic discrimination against Indigenous
Peoples and Afro-Paraguayans. The
Committee also highlighted weak state
protection of rights to prior consultation and
Indigenous Peoples’ rights over their lands,
territories and resources.
In November, the UN Special Rapporteur
on the right to food visited Paraguay and met
with public authorities and members of civil
society. She was due to present her report on
the visit in 2017.
292
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In February, the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights granted precautionary
measures to Ayoreo Totobiegosode
communities living in voluntary isolation,
calling on the Paraguayan government to
protect the communities from third parties
seeking to access their ancestral lands. In
October, the CERD Committee called on
Paraguay to fully abide by these
precautionary measures.
In October, the Yakye Axa community
remained without access to their lands
despite a ruling from the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights ordering the
government to construct an access route.
The CERD Committee called on Paraguay to
intensify efforts to effectively comply with the
Court’s judgment.
The case regarding the ownership of land
expropriated from the Sawhoyamaxa
community was still pending at the end of the
year despite the fact that in June 2015 the
Supreme Court of Justice had rejected the
appeal brought by a livestock company to
stall the effects of a law passed to return the
land to the community.
In October, the CERD Committee urged
Paraguay to take effective measures to
address problems related to access to food,
drinking water, sanitation and child
malnutrition among Indigenous Peoples and
Afro-Paraguayans living in rural areas.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTIONS
In September, members of the Senate filed a
complaint with the Attorney General over the
forced eviction of 200 families from the
Guahory campesino (peasant farmer)
community and the failure of the government
to investigate the situation. In December,
another eviction took place in this community
during a dialogue process between Guahory
members and representatives of the National
Institute of Rural Development and Land,
aimed at assessing information related to
land tenure in the community.
In September, human rights organizations
reported the forced eviction of the Avá
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Guaraní de Sauce community in connection
with the Itaipu hydroelectric installation. 1991 was among the principal drivers behind
the demand for increased protection.
JUSTICE SYSTEM HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In July, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights expressed concern over the
conviction of 11 campesinos in connection
with a massacre in Curuguaty in 2012 that
left 17 dead. There were reports of
irregularities during proceedings regarding
the right to an adequate defence and due
process.
In October, following a UPR
recommendation, the Senate initiated
proceedings to create an independent
committee to investigate the massacre at
Curuguaty in order to ensure access to
justice for the victims and their relatives. Lawyer and human rights defender Julia
Cabello Alonso was warned that she would be
disbarred from the Bar Association of
Paraguay and prevented from exercising her
professional functions because of alleged
non-compliance with professional ethics
when defending the restitution of Indigenous
Peoples’ lands.
In its October report, the CERD Committee
recommended that Paraguay take steps to
strengthen the protection of human rights
defenders, including Indigenous leaders and
those who defend Indigenous Peoples’ rights,
against intimidation, threats and arbitrary
actions by governmental officials.
Similarly, the Human Rights Council
recommended that Paraguay combats
impunity for all violations against, including
killings of, human rights defenders, as well as
investigates allegations of abusive practices
by security and law enforcement forces
targeted at Indigenous People, and
prosecutes those found responsible.
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In December, the Chamber of Deputies
issued Law 5.777 on comprehensive
protection of women from all forms of
violence. Femicide was recognized as a
distinct criminal offence punishable by a
minimum of 10 years’ imprisonment. A ban
on requiring conciliation between victims of
violence and offenders was also approved.
The law was due to enter into force after one
year.
Pregnancies among girls and young
teenagers were alarmingly high. In October,
the Centre for Documentation and Research
reported that there were on average between
500 and 700 pregnancies among girls aged
between 10 and 14 each year. Similar
concerns were raised in a UNFPA report,
Young Paraguay, which indicated that
pregnancy among this group had risen by
over 62.6% in the last decade. The principal
causes were given as violence against
women, social exclusion and macho culture.
PERU
Republic of Peru
Head of state and government: Pedro Pablo Kuczynski
Godard (replaced Ollanta Moisés Humala Tasso in July)
There was a notable increase in violence
towards – and lack of protection of –
marginalized groups, particularly women
and girls, Indigenous Peoples as well as
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) people. The government
ratified the Arms Trade Treaty.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION BACKGROUND
In November a draft bill was presented to
establish protection mechanisms for
journalists, media workers and human rights
defenders. The failure to investigate and
prosecute the killings of 17 journalists since In June, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski Godard was
elected President in the second round of
elections.
Over 200 cases of social protest were
registered, around 70% of which were related
to disputes between communities, extractive
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
293companies and the government over the
ownership, use and enjoyment of natural
resources as well as the protection of the
environment.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
harassed, threatened and attacked in the
context of social protests – especially those
related to land, territorial and environmental
issues. The police used excessive and
unnecessary force, including lethal weapons,
to repress protests. In October, Quintino
Cereceda died of a bullet wound to the head
when the police dispersed a protest against
the mining project in Las Bambas, Apurímac
region.
On two occasions, Máxima Acuña and her
family were attacked and intimidated by
security personnel from the Yanacocha
mining company, who destroyed their crops.
The company claimed it was exercising its
“possessory right to defence”. Máxima
Acuña, her family and another 48 activists
and peasant farmers from Cajamarca region
were beneficiaries of precautionary measures
granted in 2014 by the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights to guarantee
their safety.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The investigation into the deaths of four
Asháninka leaders from Ucayali region who
had allegedly been killed in 2014 by illegal
loggers had yet to be concluded by the end
of the year. The leaders had previously
denounced the continuous illegal logging on
their territory.
Throughout the year there were 13 oil
spills from the Northern Peruvian Pipeline,
contaminating water and land belonging to
Indigenous Peoples in the Amazon basin.
Indigenous organizations in the affected
areas went on strike from September,
demanding that the government address
issues like the population’s health and
reparations for damage to the environment.
In December the Indigenous organizations
and the government signed an agreement on
the issue.
294
In September, the Bagua Criminal Court
acquitted 53 accused Indigenous people,
who had been charged with crimes including
killing 12 police officers in clashes with
security forces in 2009. At the end of the
year no state officials had been prosecuted
for their role in escalating the conflict.
IMPUNITY
Some progress was made in the investigation
of human rights violations committed during
the internal armed conflict (1980-2000).
In June, the Law on the Search of
Disappeared Persons was enacted.
In July, the trial began of 11 military
personnel accused of sexual violence against
rural women between 1984 and 1995 in
Manta and Vilca, Huancavelica region.
In August, 10 military personnel were
found guilty of the extrajudicial execution of
69 people in Accomarca village in 1985.
There were 23 children among the victims.
In September, three high-ranking officials
were charged with having forcibly
disappeared two students and a teacher in
1993 in basements of the Military Intelligence
Service headquarters.
In October, the trial of 35 former marines
began for the massacre in El Frontón prison
in 1986, when 133 prisoners accused of
terrorism were extrajudicially executed.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Violence against women and girls continued;
there were reports that 108 women had been
killed by their partners as well as reports of
222 cases of attempted murder of women
and girls. Most cases were not investigated or
resulted in suspended prison sentences.
Trafficking for sexual exploitation
Women made up 80% of human trafficking
victims; 56% of the victims were under 18
years of age, with the majority trafficked for
sexual exploitation in mining areas.
In September, the Permanent Criminal
Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice
ratified a judgment of acquittal in a human
trafficking case involving a 15-year-old girl.
The Chamber argued that working over 13
Amnesty International Report 2016/17hours a day as an “escort” in a bar in an
illegal mining operation did not constitute
labour exploitation or sexual exploitation, as
“the workload did not exhaust the worker”.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The rate of teenage pregnancy increased. In
some regions of the Amazon it reached
32.8% of girls and women between 15 and
19 years of age; 60% of pregnancies among
girls aged 12-16 resulted from rape.
Forty-three cases of “risk to personal
safety” (cases of threats and intimidation)
and eight murders of LGBTI people were
registered by NGOs. However, a reform to the
Criminal Code which would have criminalized
discrimination and attacks on the grounds of
sexual orientation and gender identity failed
to pass due to the change of government and
of Congress.
In December, a bill that would recognize
the gender of transgender people was
presented in Parliament.
In July, the Public Prosecutor’s Office
closed the investigation into the case of over
2,000 Indigenous men and women who were
allegedly forcibly sterilized in the 1990s. Only
five health personnel were investigated for
their role in the forced sterilization.
The registration of victims of forced
sterilization was initiated in five regions of the
country, and by the end of the year more
than 2,000 victims were registered.
In August, a court of first instance in Lima,
the capital, ordered the Ministry of Health to
distribute emergency oral contraceptives free
of charge.
Abortion remained criminalized in almost
all cases, leading to clandestine and unsafe
abortions. In October, several members of
Parliament presented draft legislation to
Congress to decriminalize abortion in cases
of sexual violence.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
PHILIPPINES
Republic of the Philippines
Head of state and government: Rodrigo Roa Duterte
(replaced Benigno S. Aquino III in June)
The government launched a campaign to
crackdown on drugs in which over 6,000
people were killed. Human rights defenders
and journalists were also targeted and killed
by unidentified gunmen and armed militia.
The use of unnecessary and excessive force
by police continued. In a landmark ruling
the courts convicted a police officer for
torture for the first time under the 2009
Anti-Torture Act.
BACKGROUND
In September, the Philippines accepted the
Chair of ASEAN for 2017.
In November, street protests took place
after the body of former President Ferdinand
Marcos, during whose presidency
widespread human rights violations were
committed, was re-buried in the Heroes
Cemetery, a move backed by the President.
The Philippines was reviewed by the UN
Committee against Torture, the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (CESCR) and the UN Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW).
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In June, the government launched a
campaign to crackdown on drugs which led
to a wave of unlawful killings across the
country, many of which may have amounted
to extrajudicial executions. 1 These killings
followed the election of President Duterte,
who repeatedly and publicly endorsed the
arrest and killing of those suspected of using
or selling drugs. No police officers or private
individuals were known to have faced
charges for over 6,000 deaths during the
year. Witnesses and families of victims feared
coming forward in case of reprisals.
The majority of victims were reported to be
young men, some of whom were suspected
295of using or selling small amounts of
methamphetamines. Victims included the
Mayor of Albuera, Rolando Espinosa Senior,
who was shot dead in his prison cell while
being served a search warrant. President
Duterte had publicly branded the Mayor a
leading drug dealer. Despite an investigation
by the National Bureau of Investigations,
which recommended that charges be filed
against the police officers allegedly
responsible, the President promised to
protect the police.
As a result of the so-called “war on drugs”,
at least 800,000 people reportedly
“surrendered” to the authorities in fear they
would be targeted on suspicion of drug-
related offences. Consequently, prisons were
severely overcrowded, exacerbating an
already acute problem.
Journalists remained at risk, with at least
three killed while carrying out their work. Alex
Balcoba, a crime reporter for the People’s
Brigada, was killed when he was shot in the
head in May by an unidentified gunman in
Quiapo in the capital Manila, outside his
family’s shop. Families of victims marked the
seventh anniversary of the Maguindanao
massacre in which 32 journalists and another
26 people were killed. No one had been held
to account for these crimes by the end of the
year.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment in
police custody continued. In March, police
officer Jerick Dee Jimenez was convicted of
torturing bus driver Jerryme Corre, and
sentenced to a maximum of two
years and one month’s imprisonment. It was
the first conviction under the 2009 Anti-
Torture Act. However, many other cases were
still awaiting justice. 2 In July, a postmortem
conducted by the Commission on Human
Rights of the Philippines recorded torture
marks on the bodies of father and son
Renato and J.P. Bertes, who were shot dead
in police custody.
A bill to establish a National Preventative
Mechanism on torture stalled during the year.
In May, the UN Committee against Torture
296
expressed concern about torture by police
and urged the Philippines to close all places
of secret detention where detainees,
including children, were subjected to torture
or other ill-treatment.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The use of unnecessary and excessive force
by police continued. In April, the police used
force, including firearms, to disperse over
5,000 farmers who had blockaded a national
highway in Kidapawan City during a
demonstration demanding rice subsidies. At
least two people died during the incident and
dozens were injured. 3 In July, the
Commission on Human Rights of the
Philippines published a report which found
that excessive and unjustified force had been
used by the police during the incident but no
police officers were prosecuted for related
offences by the end of the year.
In October, the police brutally suppressed
a rally organized by Indigenous Peoples’
organizations in front of the US Embassy. The
protest called for an end to militarization and
encroachment onto ancestral lands.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In July, environmentalist Gloria Capitan was
killed by two gunmen in Mariveles, Bataan
province. She was involved in opposing a
coal mining project in her community. In
October, the UN CESCR expressed concern
at the continuing harassment, enforced
disappearances and killings of human rights
defenders, and the low level of investigations
into, and prosecutions and convictions for
these crimes.
DEATH PENALTY
In July, ruling party congressmen proposed
bills to reintroduce the death penalty for a
wide range of offences. If passed, the
punishment, which was abolished in 2006,
would apply to crimes including rape, arson,
drug trafficking and possession of small
amounts of drugs. The bills sparked an
outcry from human rights organizations on
the grounds that they would violate
international human rights law, and would not
Amnesty International Report 2016/17deter crime. 4 Bills were also filed proposing to
lower to nine years old the age of criminal
responsibility.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Abuses of international human rights and
humanitarian law by armed militia continued.
More than a year after the 2015 killing of
three leaders of the Lumad community in
Lianga, Surigao del Sur province, the
suspected perpetrators had not been
prosecuted and over 2,000 people remained
displaced from their homes. In October, anti-
mining activist, Jimmy P. Sayman died a day
after being shot in an ambush by unidentified
gunmen in Montevista town, Mindanao. Local
human rights organizations alleged that
paramilitaries were responsible.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD OF
LIVING, EDUCATION AND JUSTICE
The UN CESCR condemned the failure to pay
the minimum wage for all but 13% of the
workforce, and the fact that several sectors
were exempt from benefiting from the
minimum wage.
1. Philippines: Duterte’s 100 days of carnage (News story, 7 October)
2. Philippines: Historic ruling on police torture following Amnesty
International campaign (News story, 1 April)
3. Philippines: Ensure accountability for police use of excessive force
against demonstrators (ASA 35/3800/2016)
4. Philippines: Lawmakers must urgently oppose attempts to
reintroduce death penalty (ASA 35/5222/2016)
POLAND
Republic of Poland
Head of state: Andrzej Duda
Head of government: Beata Szydło
The government undertook significant legal
reforms, in particular concerning the
Constitutional Tribunal. There were 214
legislative amendments and laws enacted
since the Law and Justice party came to
power in October 2015. The speed of the
legal reforms and the lack of adequate
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
consultation with civil society were widely
criticized.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
Several amendments to the Law on the
Constitutional Tribunal deepened the
constitutional crisis that started in 2015; they
were considered wholly or partially
unconstitutional, according to the
Constitutional Tribunal’s rulings in March
and August.
In January, the European Commission
initiated for the first time a structured
dialogue with Poland under the Rule of Law
Framework giving it until 27 October 2016 to
outline steps taken to remedy the crisis.
Poland responded that it would not
implement the recommendations and that
they were “based on incorrect assumptions”.
The judges elected by the previous
Parliament were not appointed and the Prime
Minister refused to publish several of the
Tribunal’s judgments. A July amendment to
the Law on the Constitutional Tribunal
introduced a requirement to examine cases
in sequence of registration, depriving the
Tribunal of its case prioritization competence.
In November, the UN Human Rights
Committee issued its concluding observations
on Poland; the Committee recommended,
among other issues, that Poland ensure
respect for and protection of the integrity and
independence of the Tribunal and its judges
and that it ensure implementation and
publication of all the Tribunal judgments. 1
Following the adoption of three new laws
regarding the Constitutional Tribunal and the
appointment of a new Tribunal President, the
European Commission raised new concerns
and issued a complementary
Recommendation in December, giving
Poland two months to address the systemic
threat to the rule of law in the country.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
Under the new Law on Prosecution enacted
in January, the functions of Prosecutor
General and Minister of Justice were merged
and the Prosecutor General’s powers
297broadened. These reforms had significant
implications for the right to a fair trial and the
independence of the judiciary. 2
In June, President Duda refused to
appoint nine judges nominated for promotion
to higher instance courts and one judge
nominated for office by the National Council
of the Judiciary. No reason was given for the
President’s decision.
Counter-terror and security
In June, a new Counter-terrorism Law was
enacted, following a fast-track legislative
process. It consolidated extensive powers in
the hands of the Internal Security Agency
with no independent oversight mechanism to
prevent abuse and ensure accountability.
Terrorism-related crimes and “incidents”
were broadly defined in the law and the
accompanying regulation. Foreign nationals
were particularly targeted in the new law,
which allowed for their covert surveillance,
including through wire-tapping, monitoring of
electronic communications,
telecommunication networks, and devices
without judicial oversight for three months,
after which the surveillance may be extended
by a court order. These measures could be
employed if there was a “fear”, rather than a
reasonable suspicion, that the person may be
involved in terrorism-related activities. The
Counter-terrorism Law introduced several
other provisions, such as admissibility of
illegally obtained evidence, extension of pre-
charge detention to 14 days, and the removal
of certain safeguards around permissible use
of lethal force in the context of counter-
terrorism operations.
Under the amended Police Act,
surveillance powers were expanded allowing
courts to authorize secret surveillance for
three months – to be extended to a maximum
of 18 months – on the basis of a broad list of
crimes and without a requirement to consider
proportionality. The amendments also
allowed for metadata to be accessed directly
by the police without a court order.
Confidentiality of information covered by
professional privilege, for example, available
to criminal defence solicitors, was also
298
compromised as surveillance of lawyers’
communications was not prohibited. 3
The UN Human Rights Committee
recommended, among other issues, that
Poland ensured the Penal Code defined
terrorism-related crimes in terms of purpose,
narrowly defined their nature and that it
provided a precise definition of “terrorist
incidents”.
The criminal investigation into Poland’s co-
operation with the CIA and the hosting of a
secret detention site was still pending. The
2015 European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) judgments in the cases of al-Nashiri
and Abu Zubaydah were not fully
implemented.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
In July, the National Media Council became
operational; it appointed and recalled
management and supervisory boards of
public media organizations. Its composition
and the rules of voting allowed the ruling
party to control the Council’s decisions.
The government’s effective control over
public media and the resulting restrictions on
the freedom of the press resulted in Poland’s
drop in the 2016 World Press Freedom Index
from place 18 down to 47, out of 180
countries. By the end of the year, 216
journalists and administrative staff in public
media organizations were dismissed, forced
to resign or transferred to less influential
positions, according to the association
Society of Journalists. In December, a
proposal of the Marshal of the Sejm (lower
house of the Parliament) to severely restrict
journalists’ access to the Parliament sparked
mass protests and a parliamentary crisis, with
opposition MPs “occupying” the podium.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In December, the Parliament passed a
restrictive amendment to the Law on
Assemblies, despite negative opinions of the
Polish Human Rights Commissioner and the
Supreme Court and strong criticism from
nearly 200 NGOs. The President did not sign
Amnesty International Report 2016/17the amendment, referring it to the
Constitutional Tribunal instead. 2. Poland: Dismantling rule of law? Amnesty International submission
for the UN Universal Periodic Review – 27th session of the UPR
working group, April/May 2017 (EUR 37/5069/2016)
DISCRIMINATION 3. Poland: New surveillance law a major blow to human rights (EUR
37/3357/2016)
Serious gaps remained in the law regarding
discrimination and hate crimes related to
age, disability, gender, gender identity and
expression, sexual orientation and social or
economic status. In April, the Council for the
Prevention of Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance was
abolished.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Poland did not accept any refugees from
other EU member states under the
mandatory relocation quota. The authorities
continued to use detention disproportionately
for migrants and asylum-seekers.
Civil society organizations reported there
were barriers to accessing the asylum
procedure, including numerous cases where
people were unable to apply for international
protection at the Brest/Terespol border
crossing between Belarus and Poland. In
June, the ECtHR communicated the cases
A.B. v Poland and T.K. and S.B. v Poland to
the government. They concerned a family of
three Russian citizens who tried
unsuccessfully to enter Poland and lodge
asylum claims at the Brest/Terespol border
four times.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Women continued to face systemic
difficulties in accessing safe and legal
abortion; a petition proposing to further
restrict their access was considered before
Parliament at the end of the year.
After mass protests and a general women’s
strike on 3 October, Parliament rejected a bill
which proposed a near total ban on abortion
and criminalization of women and girls who
obtained an abortion and anyone assisting or
encouraging them to have an abortion. 4
1. Poland: Submission to the United Nations Human Rights Committee.
118th session, 17 October - 04 November 2016 (EUR 37/4849/2016)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
4. Poland: Women force historic U-turn on proposed abortion ban (News
story, 6 October); A dangerous backward step for women and girls in
Poland (News story, 19 September)
PORTUGAL
Portuguese Republic
Head of state: Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa (replaced
Aníbal António Cavaco Silva in March)
Head of government: António Costa
Austerity measures restricted the rights of
people with disabilities. There were reports
of ill-treatment in prisons and of inadequate
prison conditions. Discrimination against
Roma continued unabated.
DISCRIMINATION
Portugal continued to fail to ensure that hate
crimes were prohibited in law, and had not
created a national data collection system for
hate crimes.
People with disabilities
In April, the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities asked Portugal to
review austerity measures that have reduced
the availability of services for people with
disabilities and forced many of them into
poverty or extreme poverty. The Committee
expressed concern about cuts to resources
for inclusive education for children with
disabilities and support for their families.
These measures had particularly negative
effects on women caregivers who in most
cases cared for children with disabilities.
Roma
In June, the European Commission against
Racism and Intolerance reported that
Portugal had not fully implemented the
measures it had recommended in 2013 to
address racism and discrimination towards
Roma communities, especially regarding data
collection and the simplification of
299procedures to report cases of discrimination
to the High Commissioner for Migration.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
In June, the Portuguese Observatory on the
Health System reported continuing
inequalities in accessing health care, in
particular for the most marginalized people.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There were reports of unnecessary or
excessive use of force by law enforcement
officials throughout the year.
In October, according to a report by a
Portuguese NGO, 13 prisoners were beaten
by prison guards during the inspection of
their cells at Carregueira Prison in the capital
Lisbon. At least three of them required
hospital treatment as a result.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prison conditions remained inadequate; in
some prisons they were degrading. There
was a lack of hygiene, food quality, medical
care and access to medicines.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In February, Parliament voted to override a
presidential veto of a law granting same-sex
couples the right to adopt children. The law
was initially passed in November 2015; the
new law entered into force in March.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Thirty-nine refugees previously selected for
resettlement in Portugal between 2014 and
2016 had arrived in the country by the end of
2015. The government committed to resettle
over 260 refugees in 2016/2017.
Only 781 asylum-seekers were transferred
from Greece and Italy to Portugal under the
EU relocation mechanism as of the end of
the year, out of the 1,742 that Portugal had
committed to receive.
In October, the municipal authorities of
Amadora forcibly evicted at least four migrant
families without meaningful prior consultation
and the provision of adequate alternative
accommodation.
300
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In February, the Parliament approved
changes to legislation on access to sexual
and reproductive health services. The new
law removed mandatory psychological and
social counselling as a condition for women’s
access to abortion.
In May, new legislation was adopted giving
all women access to assisted reproductive
technology (ART) – including in vitro
fertilization and other methods – regardless of
their marital status or sexual orientation. This
put an end to former restrictions that limited
ART to married women or women in a civil
partnership with a man.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In November, the government announced
plans to exempt victims of sexual
harassment, rape, female genital mutilation,
slavery and human trafficking from the
payment of judicial costs.
According to data provided by the NGO
UMAR, as of November, 22 women had been
killed, and there were 23 attempted murders.
PUERTO RICO
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
Head of state: Barack Obama
Head of government: Alejandro García Padilla
There was progress towards achieving
equality and justice in relation to the
human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people;
however, they continued to face
discrimination in terms of their health and
wellbeing. The reform of the police
continued to have limited impact and
incidents of excessive use of force were
reported. The new federal law Puerto Rico
Oversight, Management, and Economic
Stability Act (PROMESA) caused serious
concern as to its possible repercussions on
economic, social and cultural rights, in
particular for the most vulnerable groups in
society.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
A report compiled by academic organizations
and presented to the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights in April raised
concerns about the impact of government
fiscal austerity measures on the standard of
living of Puerto Ricans. There were fears that
these measures would trigger an increase in
poverty among vulnerable groups and cause
increased exclusion, inequality and
discrimination.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Despite recent progress in ensuring the rights
of LGBTI people, there were continued
reports of violations of rights related to access
to health services, particularly for transgender
people. The policies of the Department of
Health in relation to guaranteeing equal
access to health services remained
unchanged and, although the government
allowed gender to be changed on state
identity documents, there were continued
reports of incidents of discrimination at the
time of issue of identity documents.
Following the introduction of Charter 19, a
new internal policy of the Puerto Rican
Department of Education which sought to
implement an educational curriculum with an
integrated gender perspective in the country’s
public schools, cases of discrimination and
harassment of LGBTI students or those
perceived to be LGBTI came to light. There
were reports of students being suspended for
wearing a uniform or having a hairstyle which
were “inconsistent with their biological sex”.
In July, a US federal government directive
was published which stipulated that
transgender students must be allowed to use
bathrooms which correspond to the gender
they identify with. This directive had not been
fully implemented.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
of the policies and practices of the Puerto
Rican police. This led to the creation of
important new policies on areas such as
control of the use of force and interaction
with members of the transgender community.
However, civil society organizations expressed
serious concern over the legitimacy of the
reform due to the lack of transparency and
genuine participation of civil society in the
process. Internal accountability mechanisms
for the police remained deficient and an
external monitoring mechanism had still not
been put in place, despite repeated calls
from civil society for this to be implemented.
Civil society organizations continued to
report excessive use of force by the police,
death threats by police against citizens and
excessive use of electric-shock weapons,
including on people with mental health
problems or people who did not comply with
police orders.
DEATH PENALTY
Although the death penalty was abolished in
Puerto Rico in 1929, it could still be imposed
under US federal law. No death penalty cases
were reported in 2016.
QATAR
State of Qatar
Head of state: Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al
Thani
Head of government: Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin
Khalifa Al Thani
The authorities unduly restricted the rights
to freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly. One prisoner of
conscience was pardoned and released.
Migrant workers faced exploitation and
abuse. Discrimination against women
remained entrenched in both law and
practice. The courts imposed death
sentences; no executions were reported.
In 2013, the government signed an
agreement with the US Department of Justice
aimed at bringing about an in-depth reform
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
301BACKGROUND
Qatar remained part of the Saudi Arabia-led
international coalition engaged in armed
conflict in Yemen (see Yemen entry).
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to unduly restrict
the rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly. The
authorities did not permit the existence of
independent political parties, and worker
associations were only permitted for Qatari
citizens if they met strict criteria.
Unauthorized public gatherings were not
permitted and were dispersed, and laws
criminalizing expression deemed offensive to
the Emir were maintained.
The poet and prisoner of conscience
Mohammed al-Ajami (also known as Ibn
Dheeb) was released on 15 March under an
unconditional pardon granted by the Emir.
He had been serving a 15-year prison
sentence imposed in 2012 for writing and
reciting poems deemed offensive to the Emir
and the state.
The independent online news outlet Doha
News was blocked within Qatar for “licensing
issues”. Doha News‘ independent journalism
had covered sensitive topics in Qatar, which
is likely to have led to their blocking by the
two local internet service providers.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 2 May, the Court of Cassation in the
capital, Doha, confirmed the conviction and
15-year prison sentence imposed on Filipino
national Ronaldo Lopez Ulep on espionage
charges. His conviction in 2014 was largely
based on a “confession” in Arabic, a
language that he cannot read, with no
investigation into his allegation that security
officers had forced him to sign the
“confession” under torture and other ill-
treatment. The Court of Appeal, which
reduced his original life sentence to 15 years,
and the Court of Cassation also failed to
investigate his allegations of torture when
upholding his conviction. While in prison, his
302
right to access to his family continued to be
violated.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers, who comprise a large
majority of Qatar’s population, continued to
face exploitation and abuse. Law No.21 of
2015, which took effect on 13 December
2016, more than a year after its enactment,
replaced the 2009 Sponsorship Law,
introducing some minor improvements such
as the removal of the two-year ban on
migrant workers returning to Qatar after
leaving. However, it retained key elements of
the 2009 law that facilitate serious human
rights abuses, including forced labour. Under
the new law, migrant workers were still
required to obtain an exit permit from their
employer to leave Qatar, violating their right
to freedom of movement. If workers were
blocked from leaving, they could appeal;
however, no official guidance on how appeals
would be determined was published. The
new law also allowed employers to prevent
migrant workers from changing their jobs for
up to five years, depending on the terms of
their contracts, and allowed employers to
retain migrant workers’ passports with their
written consent, enshrining into law the
practice of passport retention which is used
by exploitative employers to exert control over
migrant workers.
The International Labour Organization
(ILO) visited Qatar in March 2016. The high-
level delegation assessed measures taken by
the government to address issues raised in a
complaint filed in relation to violation of the
Forced Labour Convention and Labour
Inspection Convention. The delegation’s
report acknowledged steps taken by the
Qatari authorities to address migrant labour
abuse but noted many remaining challenges.
The ILO governing body deferred its decision
on whether to appoint a commission of
inquiry on Qatar until March 2017.
The Wage Protection System, which made
payment of wages by electronic bank transfer
mandatory, was implemented throughout
2016. According to government figures, by
November some 1.8 million people were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17covered by the system. Some migrant
workers employed on high-profile
construction projects were relocated to the
Labor City and Barwa Al Bahara complexes,
built by the government to accommodate up
to 150,000 low-income migrant workers with
better conditions and facilities. A 2010 law
effectively prohibiting migrant workers from
living in urban residential districts continued
to restrict the supply of available housing for
migrant workers, thereby exacerbating
overcrowding elsewhere and condemning
most migrant workers to inadequate living
conditions. In April, census data published
by the Ministry of Development Planning and
Statistics indicated that 1.4 million people
were living in labour camps.
Domestic workers, mostly women,
remained at particular risk of exploitation and
abuse as they continued to be excluded from
existing labour protections. A long-proposed
law to protect domestic workers’ rights
continued to be delayed. In July, Qatar’s
National Human Rights Committee
recommended the introduction of a law to
protect the human rights of domestic migrant
workers and provide them with access to
justice for abuses.
In response to evidence that migrant
workers had been subjected to abuse while
refurbishing the Khalifa International Stadium
and surrounding Aspire Zone sporting
complex – a 2022 World Cup venue – the
government announced in April that the
Ministry of Administrative Development,
Labour and Social Affairs would investigate
the contractors involved in the abuses. The
Supreme Committee for Delivery and Legacy,
which is responsible for overseeing all 2022
World Cup projects, announced
“rectification” programmes for contractors
involved in abuses and placed restrictions on
future bids for World Cup contracts from a
main subcontractor. Some labour supply
companies were banned from working on
2022 World Cup projects, including one
found to be using forced labour. In November
the Supreme Committee signed a year-long
agreement with the international trade union
Building and Wood Workers’ International to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
carry out joint inspections of the working and
housing conditions of certain migrant
construction workers and to publish details of
these inspections. The agreement was limited
to World Cup projects and did not cover
associated infrastructure projects such as
highways, rail networks or hotels.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice and were inadequately
protected against violence within the family.
Personal status laws continued to
discriminate against women in relation to
marriage, divorce, inheritance, child custody,
nationality and freedom of movement.
DEATH PENALTY
The courts imposed new death sentences
and others were confirmed by the Appeals
Court; no executions were reported.
ROMANIA
Republic of Romania
Head of state: Klaus Iohannis
Head of government: Dacian Julien Cioloș
Roma continued to experience systemic
discrimination, forced evictions and other
human rights violations. The Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence entered into force in
September. A public hearing was held in
the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) case against Romania for
complicity in the US-led rendition and
secret detention programmes, but a ruling
in the four-year-old case remained pending.
Following parliamentary elections in
December, Sorin Mihai Grindeanu was
nominated as Prime Minister by the
President and was to take office on 4
January 2017.
DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
In his April report, the UN Special
Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human
303rights called on the authorities to
acknowledge the severe discrimination
against Roma, to implement the 2015-2020
Roma Inclusion Strategy and take targeted
measures in education, health care and
employment, including the introduction of
legal safeguards against forced evictions and
improved access to social housing. In June,
the Council of Europe Commissioner for
Human Rights raised similar concerns.
Housing rights – forced eviction
Romania and found that 82 out of the 394
schools across the region displayed some
form of segregation of Roma children. In
November and December, the Ministry of
Education held a public consultation on a
draft framework which prohibited school
segregation. The framework expanded the
criteria for inclusion in education, set new
legal obligations and sanctions for authorities
and defined the role of a National
Commission for Desegregation and Inclusion.
In March, the ECtHR issued interim
measures urging the authorities to stop the
eviction of 10 Roma families in the town of
Eforie. This would have been the third forced
eviction of the families who were among the
101 people, including 55 children, whose
homes had been demolished in 2013. In
June, the Constanţa County Court ruled that
the 2013 demolition was unlawful and the
municipality should provide the families with
adequate housing. At the end of year, their
housing situation remained precarious.
The 300 Roma forcibly evicted from the
centre of Cluj-Napoca in 2010 and relocated
to Pata Rat area – known for its waste dump,
chemical dump and two already existing
Roma settlements – were still fighting for
justice in domestic courts, assisted by the
NGO European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC).
Toxic smoke from several fires on newly
established waste dumps caused inhabitants
respiratory issues, according to residents and
NGOs. The UN Special Rapporteur on
extreme poverty and human rights visited the
Pata Rat area and noted the “primitive
conditions”, including no electricity, as well
as damp and overcrowded accommodation. POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Right to education The monitoring mechanism required by the
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, ratified by Romania in 2011, was
created but was not operational at the end of
2016.
In May, the NGOs ERRC and Romani CRISS
urged the European Commission to launch
an investigation into breaches by Romania of
EU anti-discrimination legislation with respect
to persistent patterns of segregation of Roma
children in schools. The Centre for Advocacy
and Human Rights in partnership with the
Centre for Resources for Public Participation
surveyed 112 municipalities in northeast
304
In January, the ECtHR ruled that Romania
had violated the rights of four members of the
Boaca family. It found that they were
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment
and discriminated against. In March 2006,
police officers had physically assaulted them
in the police station in Clejani in Giurgiu
County. Ion Boaca, father of the other three
Roma victims, required 19 days of
hospitalization after being kicked in the ribs
and punched.
In June, the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe closed the supervision of
the implementation of a group of key ECtHR
judgments – known as the Barbu Anghelescu
group – concerning police brutality against
Roma and ineffective investigations,
including possible racist motives. ERRC,
Romani CRISS and APADOR-Helsinki
Committee warned against the decision
arguing that the government had not taken
adequate measures to execute the judgments
and tackle, among other issues, widespread
institutional racism.
DISCRIMINATION – PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
According to the Civil Code, same-sex
marriages and civil unions were prohibited
Amnesty International Report 2016/17and those contracted abroad not recognized.
The case of a same-sex couple seeking
recognition of their marriage officiated in
Belgium remained under examination by the
Constitutional Court. In November, the
Constitutional Court sought preliminary ruling
from the European Court of Justice on the
harmonic interpretation of EU legislation on
freedom of movement and residence for
same-sex couples.
The Coalition for Family – a group of some
30 associations and foundations – ran a
campaign until May to put forward a
legislative proposal to restrict the
constitutional definition of “family” from
“marriage between spouses” to “marriage
between a man and a woman”. In July, the
Constitutional Court allowed the proposal to
be put to Parliament to decide on whether or
not to hold a national referendum. The
decision remained pending at the end of the
year.
In April, the ECtHR found that authorities
failed to carry out an effective investigation
into the attack – including its potentially
discriminatory motive – on Bucharest Pride
march participants in 2006.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In June, the ECtHR held a public hearing in
the case against Romania for complicity in
the US-led rendition and secret detention
programmes, which the CIA operated globally
in the aftermath of the 11 September 2001
attacks in the USA. 1 Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri,
a Saudi Arabian national currently held in the
US detention centre at Guantánamo Bay,
Cuba, had lodged an application against
Romania in 2012 alleging that he was forcibly
disappeared and tortured at a secret CIA
detention centre in Bucharest between 2004
and 2006, and that Romania had failed to
effectively investigate his secret detention.
The hearing came after the Council of Europe
Secretary General summarily closed in
February 2016 its Article 52 inquiry into
European states’ involvement in the CIA
operations – a severe blow to accountability.
The Romanian government denied the
allegations and argued an investigation was
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
ongoing. A judgment in the case remained
pending at the end of the year.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to General Police Inspectorate
data, 8,926 cases of domestic violence were
registered in the first six months of 2016 –
79% of the victims were women and 92.3%
of the aggressors were men. National NGOs
reported that the actual number of cases was
much higher. In July, NGOs requested that
the government expedite the adoption of
measures to combat violence against women
and domestic violence. The Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention)
entered into force in September.
1. CIA rendition victims challenge Romania and Lithuania at Europe’s
human rights court (News story, 29 June)
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION
Russian Federation
Head of state: Vladimir Putin
Head of government: Dmitry Medvedev
Restrictions on rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly increased. Prosecutions of those
who had taken part in anti-government
protests in Bolotnaya Square continued and
gave rise to further concerns regarding the
respect for fair trial standards. Human
rights defenders faced fines or criminal
prosecution because of their activities. The
first criminal prosecution for failure to
comply with the “foreign agents” law was
initiated. A number of individuals were
charged under anti-extremism legislation for
criticizing state policy and publicly
displaying or possessing materials alleged
to be extremist. There were reports of
torture and other ill-treatment in
305penitentiary institutions, and prisoners’
lives were at risk because of inadequate
medical care in prisons. Serious human
rights violations continued to be reported in
the context of security operations in the
North Caucasus. People criticizing the
authorities in Chechnya faced physical
attacks by non-state actors and prosecution,
and human rights defenders reporting from
the region faced harassment from non-state
actors. Russia faced international criticism
in relation to allegations of war crimes by
its forces in Syria. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) continued its
preliminary examination of the situation in
Ukraine, which included crimes committed
in eastern Ukraine and Crimea. Russia
failed to respect the rights of asylum-
seekers and refugees.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
On 7 July, amendments to anti-extremism
legislation known as the “Yarovaya package”
were passed. The amendments were largely
inconsistent with Russia’s international
human rights obligations as they banned any
form of missionary activity outside of specially
designated religious institutions, obliged
providers of information technology to store
records of all conversations for six months
and metadata for three years, increased the
maximum punishment for extremism from
four to eight years in prison, and increased
the penalty for encouraging people to take
part in mass disturbances from five to 10
years in prison.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In March, the legislation governing public
assemblies was extended to “unauthorized”
motorcades. In August, this new provision
was used to prosecute a group of farmers
from Kuban in southern Russia who were
travelling to the capital, Moscow, in tractors
and private cars to protest against land
grabbing by agricultural holding companies.
Their leader, Aleksei Volchenko, was
sentenced to 10 days’ administrative
detention for taking part in an
306
“unsanctioned” demonstration 1 after
participating in a meeting between the
farmers and the deputy regional
Plenipotentiary of the President. Other
participants of the meeting paid fines or
served short periods of administrative
detention.
Four people were still serving their
sentences for taking part in the Bolotnaya
Square demonstration in Moscow on 6 May
2012, and two more people were charged in
connection with the events. On 5 January,
the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) found that Yevgeniy Frumkin’s right
to freedom of peaceful assembly had been
violated and that he had been arbitrarily
detained for 15 days for “failing to obey
police orders” following his participation in
the Bolotnaya Square protest. The Court
found that Yevgeniy Frumkin’s arrest,
detention and administrative punishment had
been “grossly disproportionate” and designed
to discourage him and others from
participating in protest rallies or engaging in
opposition politics.
On 12 October, Dmitry Buchenkov was
charged with taking part in mass disorder
and six counts of “non-lethal force” against
police officers during the Bolotnaya Square
demonstration. He claimed that he had been
in Nizhny Novgorod at the time and had not
participated in the demonstration. He
remained in detention at the end of the year,
having been detained since December 2015.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION – HUMAN
RIGHTS DEFENDERS
During the year, dozens of independent
NGOs receiving foreign funding were added
to the list of “foreign agents”, including the
International Historical and Human Rights
Society of Memorial.
NGOs continued to face administrative
fines for failing to comply with legislation on
“foreign agents”. On 24 June, Valentina
Cherevatenko, the founder and Chair of the
Women of the Don Union, was informed of
criminal proceedings initiated against her for
“systematic evasion of duties imposed by the
law on non-profit organizations performing
Amnesty International Report 2016/17the functions of a foreign agent”, charges
punishable by up to two years in prison. This
was the first time the relevant Criminal Code
article had been invoked since its
introduction in 2012. The criminal
investigation against Valentina Cherevatenko
was ongoing at the end of the year. Staff of
the Women of the Don Union were frequently
questioned by investigators who also
monitored all the organization’s publications.
Lyudmilla Kuzmina, a retired librarian and
the co-ordinator of the Samara branch of the
election watchdog Golos, was sued by the tax
authorities for 2,222,521 roubles (€31,000).
The tax authorities classified a grant given to
Golos by the US funding organization USAID
as profit following the declaration of the
organization as “undesirable”, and claimed
that Lyudmilla Kuzmina had falsely declared
the money a grant. On 14 March 2016, the
tax authorities successfully appealed against
a decision taken by the Samara District Court
on 27 November 2015 which found that
Lyudmilla Kuzmina had not defrauded the
government of that amount, and had not
used the money for her own gain. Following
the successful appeal by the tax authorities,
bailiffs confiscated her car and her pension
payments were stopped.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Anti-extremism legislation continued to be
used excessively in violation of the right to
freedom of expression. According to the NGO
SOVA Centre, 90% of all convictions under
anti-extremism legislation were for statements
and reposts on social media websites. On 3
November, following a request from SOVA
Centre and other NGOs, the Plenum of the
Supreme Court issued guidelines to judges
on the use of anti-extremism legislation
specifying that in order to qualify as
incitement to hatred, statements need to
include an element of violence such as calls
for genocide, mass repression, deportation or
calls for violence.
On 20 February, Yekaterina
Vologzheninova, a shop assistant from
Yekaterinburg in the Ural region, was found
guilty of “inciting hatred and enmity on the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
grounds of ethnicity” under Article 282 of the
Criminal Code following her online criticism of
Russia’s annexation of Crimea and Russia’s
military involvement in Donbass, eastern
Ukraine, which consisted primarily of reposts
of articles from Ukrainian media. Yekaterina
Vologzheninova, a single mother and sole
carer for her elderly mother, served 320
hours of unpaid “corrective labour”. The
judge also ruled that her computer must be
destroyed as a “crime weapon”.
The trial of Natalya Sharina, prisoner of
conscience and director of the state-run
Library of Ukrainian Literature in Moscow,
began on 2 November. She was accused of
“inciting hatred and enmity through misuse
of office” under Article 282 of the Criminal
Code and of fraudulent use of library funds,
offences for which she could face up to 10
years’ imprisonment. A number of books
classified as “extremist” were purportedly
found among uncatalogued literature in the
library. She remained under house arrest
which began on 30 October 2015.
NORTH CAUCASUS
Serious human rights violations, including
enforced disappearances and alleged
extrajudicial executions committed in the
course of security operations continued to be
reported from the North Caucasus. Human
rights defenders were also at risk. On 9
March, two members of the human rights
organization Joint Mobile Group (JMG), along
with their driver and six journalists from
Russian, Norwegian and Swedish media,
were assaulted while travelling from North
Ossetia to Chechnya. Their minibus was
stopped by four cars near a security
checkpoint at the administrative border
between Ingushetia and Chechnya. Twenty
masked men dragged them out of the vehicle
and severely beat them before setting fire to
the minibus. Two hours later, the JMG’s office
in Ingushetia was ransacked. On 16 March,
the JMG’s leader Igor Kalyapin was asked to
leave a hotel in the Chechen capital Grozny
by the manager because he “did not love”
the Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov. Igor
Kalyapin was then punched and pelted with
307eggs, cakes, flour and disinfectant by an
angry mob.
On 5 September, Zhalaudi Geriev, an
independent journalist known for his criticism
of the leadership of Chechnya, was
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment by
the Shali District Court of Chechnya for
possessing 167g of marijuana. At his trial he
withdrew his confession to the drugs charge,
saying that three men in plain clothes had
detained him on 16 April, forced him into a
car and driven him to a forest outside Grozny,
where he was tortured before being handed
over to law enforcement officers who forced
him to “confess”.
The Chechen leadership continued to
exercise direct pressure on the judiciary. On
5 May, Ramzan Kadyrov called a meeting of
all judges and forced four of them to resign.
There was no response from the federal
authorities.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Ukrainian nationals Mykola Karpyuk and
Stanislav Klykh were sentenced after an
unfair trial at the Supreme Court in Chechnya
to 22-and-a-half and 20 years’ imprisonment
respectively on 26 May. The sentence was
confirmed on appeal at the Russian Supreme
Court. They were convicted of leading and
fighting in an armed group that allegedly
killed 30 Russian soldiers during the conflict
in Chechnya (1994 to 1996). Both men said
that they were tortured following their arrests
in March 2014 and August 2014
respectively. Their lawyers were denied
access and basic information about their
clients’ whereabouts for several months after
their arrest. Stanislav Klykh, who had no
history of mental illness, appeared severely
disturbed throughout the trial, which began
in October 2015, possibly as a result of
torture. 2 Mykola Karpyuk’s lawyer alleged that
vital evidence for the defence that supported
his client’s alibi was left out of the case file.
The judge refused to allow witnesses to be
interviewed in Ukraine.
308
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued to
be widespread and systematic during initial
detention and in prison colonies.
On 30 August, Murad Ragimov and his
father were beaten and tortured by officers
from the Ministry of the Interior’s Special
Response Unit for two hours in the kitchen of
their home in Moscow. The officers accused
Murad Ragimov of killing a policeman in
Dagestan, and of fighting for the armed group
Islamic State in Syria. Murad Ragimov’s
cousin was handcuffed to the kitchen table
while officers tortured Murad Ragimov using
an electric-shock baton, and suffocating him
with a plastic bag. Finally, the officers
claimed to find drugs in his pockets. Murad
Ragimov was taken to the police station and
remained in detention at the end of the year
facing trial on drugs charges.
Ildar Dadin said in a letter to his wife that
he had been subjected to torture and other
ill-treatment in the prison colony in Segezha
in the Karelia region of Russia. He described
how he was repeatedly beaten by groups of
10 to 12 prison guards, including on one
occasion by the director of the prison colony.
He described his head being pushed down a
toilet and being hung by handcuffs and
threatened with rape. Ildar Dadin was placed
in a punishment cell seven times between his
arrival in the prison colony in September and
the end of the year. Following his allegations,
the prison authorities carried out an
inspection and asserted that there had been
no ill-treatment. In 2015, Ildar Dadin was the
first person to be convicted for participating
in peaceful demonstrations under Article
212.1 of the Criminal Code, which
criminalized violating the regulations for the
conduct of public meetings. He was
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment,
reduced to two-and-a-half years on appeal.
Failure to provide adequate medical care
During the course of the year the European
Court of Human Rights found in 12 cases
that prisoners in Russia had been subjected
to torture or other ill-treatment because of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17failure to provide adequate medical care in
prisons and pre-trial detention centres. On 27
April, in a report to the Federal Council, the
Prosecutor General stated that lack of
antiretroviral drugs in prisons was placing at
risk the lives of prisoners living with HIV.
According to a report by the NGO Zona
Prava, released in November, prison health
services were critically underfunded,
resulting in shortages of antiretroviral drugs
for treating HIV. The report also found that
many conditions were only diagnosed at the
critical stage, and medical staff who were
employees of the Prison Service were not
sufficiently independent. The law in principle
allowed for early release on health grounds,
but this was granted in only one in five cases
where the prisoner requested early release.
Amur Khakulov died in a prison hospital in
Kirov region, central Russia, of kidney failure
in early October. On 15 June, a court had
refused to release Amur Khakulov on medical
grounds despite a medical panel’s
recommendation that he be released. Amur
Khakulov had been in detention since
October 2005; according to his family he
developed chronic kidney disease while in
detention.
ARMED CONFLICT – SYRIA
Together with the Syrian government, Russia
carried out indiscriminate attacks and direct
attacks on civilians and civilian objects in
Syria, including civilian residential areas,
medical facilities and aid convoys, causing
thousands of civilian deaths and injuries.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
On 14 November the Prosecutor of the ICC
said that the situation within the territory of
Crimea and Sevastopol amounted to an
international armed conflict between Russia
and Ukraine. The ICC Prosecutor was
conducting an assessment as to whether the
same was true for eastern Ukraine.
On 16 November, President Putin
announced that Russia no longer intended to
become a party to the Rome Statute of the
ICC, which it signed in 2000 but did
not ratify.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Russia continued to return asylum-seekers,
refugees and migrant workers to Uzbekistan
and other countries despite the real risk that
they would be tortured and otherwise ill-
treated. 3 In many cases the individuals were
deported for overstaying their visa or not
having the correct documents under the
Administrative Code, which does not require
the court to take into account the seriousness
of the offence committed, the circumstances
of the individual and any potential
consequences for them if expelled from
Russia, nor does it provide for the individual
to receive free legal advice.
On 1 July, Uzbekistani asylum-seeker Olim
Ochilov was forcibly returned from Russia to
Uzbekistan in blatant disregard of interim
measures issued by the ECtHR on 28 June to
stop his forcible return to Uzbekistan, where
he would be at real risk of torture.
1. Russian Federation: Farmers and truck drivers imprisoned for a
peaceful protest against corruption (EUR 46/4760/2016)
2. Russian Federation: Urgent Action: Victim of unfair trial, health at
risk (EUR 46/4398/2016)
3. Uzbekistan: Fast track to torture, abductions and forcible returns
from Russia to Uzbekistan (EUR 62/3740/2016); Uzbekistan: Asylum-
seeker returned from Russia to Uzbekistan in blatant violation of
international law (EUR 62/4488/2016)
RWANDA
Republic of Rwanda
Head of state: Paul Kagame
Head of government: Anastase Murekezi
In the run-up to presidential elections
in 2017, the environment for free debate
and dissent continued to be hostile. High-
ranking army officers were handed heavy
sentences after a flawed trial.
BACKGROUND
President Paul Kagame announced a
substantial cabinet reshuffle in October and
the closure of the Ministry for Internal
309Security, whose responsibilities were taken
over by the Ministry of Justice.
Rwanda hosted the African Union Summit
in July.
FREEDOMS OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
In March, the Democratic Green Party of
Rwanda, a registered opposition political
party, announced that it would not participate
in the 2017 presidential elections if the
government did not respond to its demands
for political and electoral reforms. The
Rwanda Governance Board rejected the
requested reforms in September. The party
nominated their president Dr Frank Habineza
as their presidential candidate on 17
December.
The United Democratic Forces (FDU-
Inkingi), an unregistered opposition political
party, continued to face serious challenges.
Party member Illuminée Iragena went
missing on her way to work on 26 March.
People close to her believe she was
unlawfully detained and tortured, and may
have died. Family members who requested a
police investigation were not given an official
response.
Another FDU-Inkingi member, Léonille
Gasengayire, was arrested and detained for
three days in March after visiting the party’s
president, Victoire Ingabire, in Kigali Central
Prison. She was arrested again in August in
Kivumu, Rutsiro district, and charged with
inciting insurrection. She remained in
custody awaiting trial.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Rwanda Law Reform Commission began
discussions with media practitioners in early
2016 on revising the 2013 Media Law. In its
roadmap for implementing the
recommendations accepted during Rwanda’s
examination in 2015 under the UN Universal
Periodic Review (UPR), the government
pledged to decriminalize “defamation”.
Journalist John Ndabarasa was last seen
in Kigali on 7 August. After his disappearance
was reported to police by the Rwanda Media
Commission, the police announced that they
310
were opening an investigation. It was not
clear whether the disappearance was related
to John Ndabarasa’s journalism or his family
connections to Joel Mutabazi, President
Kagame’s former bodyguard serving a life
sentence for treason.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
On 28 May, Congolese national Epimack
Kwokwo, programme co-ordinator of the
regional NGO Human Rights League of the
Great Lakes Region (LDGL), was expelled
from Rwanda when his work permit expired
after long delays in renewing the NGO’s
registration. He attended an appointment at
the immigration offices, was notified of his
expulsion and then driven to the border with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without being allowed to return home to
collect his belongings or inform his family.
LDGL’s re-registration was granted in
November.
CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
Individuals suspected of involvement in the
1994 genocide faced trial in Rwanda
and Sweden.
In March, the Congolese authorities
transferred Ladislas Ntaganzwa to Rwanda to
stand trial on charges of genocide and crimes
against humanity, in line with an arrest
warrant issued by the UN Mechanism for
International Criminal Tribunals – the body
responsible for following up the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which closed in December 2015.
In April, Rwanda’s High Court sentenced
to life imprisonment Léon Mugesera,
extradited from Canada in 2012. He was
convicted of incitement to commit genocide,
inciting ethnic hatred and persecution as a
crime against humanity. He was acquitted of
preparing and planning the genocide and
conspiracy to commit genocide.
In May, a court in Sweden convicted
Claver Berinkindi of genocide and sentenced
him to life in prison. Damages of US$3,900
to 13,000 were awarded to 15 people who
had witnessed the loss of a relative or had
survived the threat of being killed themselves.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17In December, a French court confirmed
the 25-year prison sentence of Rwandan
former intelligence chief Pascal Simbikangwa
for genocide and complicity in crimes against
humanity.
Other action was taken against people
suspected of genocide-related crimes.
In July, Enoch Ruhigira, who in 1994 was
chief of staff of the then President, Juvénal
Habyarimana, was arrested in Germany at
the request of the Rwandan authorities, who
are seeking his extradition on genocide
charges.
On 28 September, university professor
Léopold Munyakazi was deported from the
USA to Rwanda. He was charged with
committing genocide, complicity in genocide,
conspiracy to commit genocide,
extermination and genocide negation. He had
been arrested after the genocide, but was
released in 1999 due to a lack of evidence.
Rwanda issued an international warrant for
his arrest in 2006 a month after he gave a
speech in which he described the massacres
of 1994 as fratricide rather than genocide. In
a hearing in October, Léopold Munyakazi
pleaded not guilty.
On 12 November, genocide suspects
Jean-Claude Iyamuremye and Jean-Baptiste
Mugimba were extradited from the
Netherlands and transferred to Kigali Central
Prison. On 17 November, Henri Jean-Claude
Seyoboka was deported from Canada,
accused of involvement in the genocide. He
had not disclosed his military background in
his asylum application.
UNFAIR TRIALS
On 31 March, the Military High Court of
Kanombe sentenced Colonel Tom
Byabagamba and retired Brigadier General
Frank Rusagara to 21 and 20 years in prison
respectively. Both were found guilty of
inciting insurrection and tarnishing the image
of the government when in a leadership
position. In violation of their right to freedom
of expression, their conviction was based on
accusations of sharing critical online articles
by email and for comments made in social
gatherings. Colonel Byabagamba was
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
additionally convicted of concealing evidence
and for contempt of the flag, and stripped of
his military rank and decorations. Frank
Rusagara was additionally convicted of illegal
possession of weapons. His former driver,
retired Sergeant François Kabayiza, was
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment for
concealing evidence. An appeal was lodged
against the verdict.
The judges failed to address adequately
François Kabayiza’s complaints in court that
he had been tortured during interrogation
and his request for the resulting testimony to
be set aside. The court found that he had not
provided evidence that he was tortured, in
violation of the principle that the prosecution
bears the burden of proving beyond
reasonable doubt that evidence was obtained
lawfully. Rwanda’s law on evidence and its
production prohibits the use of evidence
obtained through torture in court
proceedings.
As both Frank Rusagara and François
Kabayiza were retired from the military, their
lawyers argued that they should not be tried
in a military tribunal and asked for the cases
to be separated. This was refused. Despite
repeated requests, Frank Rusagara was not
permitted to call his wife in the UK before her
death from terminal cancer in August.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Burundians continued to seek asylum in
Rwanda, although at a slower rate than in
2015. At the end of 2016, Rwanda was
hosting over 80,000 Burundian refugees.
Following allegations of recruitment and
military training of refugees from camps in
Rwanda, the government announced in
February that it planned to relocate
Burundian refugees to third countries. It later
clarified that it had no relocation plans and
would continue to receive refugees from
Burundi.
Reports continued of Eritrean and
Sudanese asylum-seekers being sent from
Israel to Rwanda (see Israel and the
Occupied Palestinian Territories entry). In a
joint press conference with President
Kagame during his visit to Israel on 6 July,
311Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
said that these were not asylum-seekers but
“job seekers”. President Kagame said the two
countries were discussing the issue.
SAUDI ARABIA
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Head of state and government: King Salman bin Abdul
Aziz Al Saud
The authorities severely curtailed the rights
to freedom of expression, association and
assembly, detaining and imprisoning critics,
human rights defenders and minority rights
activists on vaguely worded charges. Torture
and other ill-treatment of detainees
remained common, particularly during
interrogation, and courts continued to
accept torture-tainted “confessions” to
convict defendants in unfair trials. Women
faced discrimination in both law and
practice and were inadequately protected
against sexual and other violence. The
authorities continued to arrest, detain and
deport irregular migrants. Courts imposed
many death sentences, including for non-
violent crimes and against juvenile
offenders; scores of executions were carried
out. Coalition forces led by Saudi Arabia
committed serious violations of
international law, including war crimes, in
Yemen.
BACKGROUND
Saudi Arabia faced growing economic
problems due to the fall in world oil prices
and the cost of its continued military
intervention in the armed conflict in Yemen.
This was reflected by reduced state spending
on social welfare and on construction leading
to the laying off of thousands of mostly south
Asian migrant workers. In April, the
authorities launched “Vision 2030”, a plan to
diversify the economy and end the country’s
dependence on income from fossil fuel
extraction. In September, the Cabinet
announced cuts to government ministers’
312
salaries and bonuses paid to state
employees.
Relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran
continued to deteriorate, exacerbated by their
support for opposing sides in the region’s
conflicts. Following the government’s
execution of prominent Shi’a Muslim Sheikh
Nimr al-Nimr and others on 2 January,
protesters stormed the Saudi Arabian
embassy in Iran’s capital, Tehran, and set it
alight, prompting Saudi Arabia to sever
diplomatic relations with Iran and expel
Iranian diplomats. The Tehran authorities
prohibited Iranians from attending the annual
Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia.
On 4 July, suicide bombers carried out
apparently co-ordinated attacks on one of
Islam’s holiest sites in Medina, the US
Consulate in Jeddah, and a Shi’a mosque in
Qatif, killing four people.
In September, the US Congress voted by a
large majority to overturn US President
Barack Obama’s veto of the Justice Against
Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA), opening
the way for families of those killed in the 11
September 2001 terrorist attacks in the USA
to seek damages from the Saudi Arabian
government.
In October, the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child urged the government to
immediately halt the execution of death row
prisoners sentenced for crimes allegedly
committed when they were under 18; to
immediately release all children sentenced to
death after unfair trials and to commute the
sentences of others; and to “unambiguously”
prohibit by law the sentencing to death of
offenders aged under 18 at the time of their
alleged crime.
ARMED CONFLICT IN YEMEN
Throughout the year the Saudi Arabia-led
military coalition supporting the
internationally recognized government in
Yemen continued to bomb areas controlled or
contested by Huthi forces and their allies in
Yemen, killing and injuring thousands of
civilians. Some attacks were indiscriminate,
disproportionate or directed against civilians
and civilian objects including schools,
Amnesty International Report 2016/17hospitals, markets and mosques. Some
coalition attacks amounted to war crimes.
The coalition used armaments supplied by
the US and UK governments, including
internationally banned cluster bombs that are
inherently indiscriminate and pose a
continuing risk to civilians because of their
frequent failure to detonate on initial impact.
In December the coalition admitted that its
forces had used UK-manufactured cluster
munitions in 2015 and stated that it would
not do so in the future. The US and UK
governments continued to assist the coalition
with arms, training, intelligence and logistical
support, despite the serious violations of
international law committed by its forces in
Yemen.
In June the UN Secretary-General
removed Saudi Arabia from a list of states
and armed groups responsible for serious
violations of children’s rights during conflict
after the government threatened to cut its
funding support for key UN programmes.
Huthi forces and their allies repeatedly
carried out indiscriminate cross-border
attacks, shelling civilian populated areas
such as Najran and Jazan in southern Saudi
Arabia, killing and injuring civilians and
damaging civilian objects.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities maintained tight restrictions
on freedom of expression and repressed
dissent. They harassed, arrested and
prosecuted critics, including writers and
online commentators, political and women’s
rights activists, members of the Shi’a
minority, and human rights defenders,
imprisoning some after courts sentenced
them to prison terms on vague charges.
In March, the Specialized Criminal Court
(SCC) in the capital, Riyadh, sentenced
journalist Alaa Brinji to five years in prison
and a fine, followed by an eight-year travel
ban, for comments he posted on Twitter.
Also in March, the SCC sentenced writer
and Islamic scholar Mohanna Abdulaziz al-
Hubail to six years’ imprisonment followed by
a six-year travel ban after convicting him in
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
his absence on charges that included
“insulting the state and its rulers”, inciting
and participating in demonstrations, and
“being in solidarity with the detained
members” of the Saudi Civil and Political
Rights Association (ACPRA) held as prisoners
of conscience. The SCC also ordered the
closure of his Twitter account.
The authorities did not permit the
existence of political parties, trade unions or
independent human rights groups, and
continued to arrest, prosecute and imprison
those who set up or participated in
unlicensed organizations.
All public gatherings, including peaceful
demonstrations, remained prohibited under
an order issued by the Ministry of the Interior
in 2011. Some who previously defied the ban
were arrested and imprisoned. Strikes
remained extremely rare but in September
foreign and Saudi Arabian nationals
employed at a private hospital in Khobar took
strike action to protest against months of
unpaid wages.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities continued to arrest, detain
and prosecute human rights defenders on
vague and overly broad charges using anti-
terrorism legislation and laws designed to
stifle peaceful criticism. Those detained, on
trial or serving prison sentences included
several members of ACPRA, an independent
human rights organization formed in 2009,
which the authorities closed down in 2013.
In May the SCC sentenced Abdulaziz al-
Shubaily, one of ACPRA’s founders, to eight
years in prison followed by an eight-year
travel ban and a ban on communicating
through social media. He was convicted of
defaming and insulting senior judges under
the anti-cybercrime law. Other charges
against him included “communicating with
foreign organizations” and providing
information on human rights violations to
Amnesty International.
In October, Mohammad al-Otaibi and
Adbullah al-Attawi, both co-founders of the
Union for Human Rights, were brought to
trial before the SCC. Both men were
313presented with a list of charges related to
their human rights work including, among
other things, “participating in setting up an
organization and announcing it before getting
an authorization” and “dividing national unity,
spreading chaos and inciting public opinion”.
Scores of other activists and human rights
defenders continued to serve lengthy prison
sentences on similar charges based on their
peaceful exercise of their human rights.
In January, security officials briefly
detained human rights defender Samar
Badawi in connection with her activities in
campaigning for the release of her former
husband, the imprisoned human rights
lawyer Waleed Abu al-Khair.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
The authorities said that the security forces
had rounded up and detained hundreds of
people they suspected of terrorism-related
offences, including alleged supporters and
affiliates of the armed groups Islamic State
and al-Qa’ida, but provided few details. Some
detainees were held in the Mohammed bin
Naif Counselling and Care Centre, a centre
designated for “terrorists” and those
“following deviant thought”.
The US authorities transferred nine
detainees – all Yemeni nationals – from
their Guantánamo Bay detention facility in
Cuba to Saudi Arabia in April.
Human rights defenders and those who
expressed political dissent continued to be
equated to “terrorists”. After being released
from al-Ha’ir prison in Riyadh where he
served a four-year term, Mohammed al-
Bajadi, a human rights defender and ACPRA
founder was held for a further four months in
the Mohammed bin Naif Counselling and
Care Centre where he received weekly
religious and psychological “counselling
sessions”.
In February the SCC began trying 32
defendants, including 30 members of the
Shi’a minority, on charges of spying for, and
passing military intelligence to Iran and
supporting protests in Qatif in the Eastern
Province, where Shi’a form a majority of the
population. The prosecution sought the death
314
penalty against 25 of the defendants. In
December, the SCC sentenced 15 of the
defendants to death following an unfair trial.
Another 15 received prison terms ranging
from six months to 25 years, and two were
acquitted.
In November, 13 women were put on trial
at the SCC on charges relating to their
participation in protests in the city of
Buraydah.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In April, the Council of Ministers issued new
regulations reducing the powers of the
Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and
Prevention of Vice, Saudi Arabia’s religious
police. In particular, the regulations barred
the religious police from making arrests and
from following suspects and requiring the
suspects to produce identification.
The authorities continued to carry out
numerous arbitrary arrests and held
detainees for prolonged periods without
referring them to a competent court, although
the Law of Criminal Procedures requires that
all detainees be referred to a court within six
months. Detainees were frequently held
incommunicado during interrogation and
denied access to lawyers, undermining their
right to fair trial and putting them at
increased risk of torture and other ill-
treatment.
In September, security authorities
arbitrarily arrested human rights activist
Salim al-Maliki after he published video
footage on Twitter of border guards evicting
tribal residents of the Jazan region, close to
Saudi Arabia’s border with Yemen. He was
held incommunicado for the first six weeks
and remained in detention at the end of the
year.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Security officials continued to torture and
otherwise ill-treat detainees with impunity,
particularly to extract “confessions” for use
as evidence against them at trial. Courts
frequently convicted defendants on the basis
of contested pre-trial “confessions”.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17The lawyer representing most of the 32
defendants accused of spying for Iran said
that they were forced to “confess”. After
arrest, they were detained incommunicado
and denied access to their families and
lawyers for three months; some were
subjected to prolonged solitary confinement.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment
The authorities continued to impose and
administer corporal punishments that violate
the prohibition of torture and other ill-
treatment, particularly floggings. In February,
the General Court in Abha sentenced
Palestinian poet and artist Ashraf Fayadh to
800 lashes and eight years’ imprisonment
when commuting his death sentence for
apostasy on account of his writing in 2015.
DISCRIMINATION – SHI’A MINORITY
Saudi Arabia’s Shi’a Muslim minority
continued to face entrenched discrimination
that severely limited their access to
government services and state employment
and their freedom of religious expression.
The authorities continued to arrest, detain
and sentence Shi’a activists to prison terms
or death after unfair trials before the SCC.
In June, the SCC sentenced 14 members
of the Shi’a minority to death after convicting
them on charges that included shooting at
security officials, inciting chaos and
participating in demonstrations and riots.
Nine others received prison terms and one
was found not guilty.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women and girls continued to face
discrimination in law and in practice, and
were inadequately protected against sexual
and other forms of violence. Women
remained legally subordinate and inferior in
status to men in relation to marriage, divorce,
child custody and inheritance, and could not
access higher education, take paid
employment or travel abroad without the
approval of their male guardian. Women also
remained banned from driving.
The government’s “Vision 2030” economic
reform plan included goals to increase the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
participation of women in Saudi Arabia’s
workforce from 22% to 30% and “invest” in
their productive capabilities so as “to
strengthen their future and contribute to the
development of our society and economy”.
No legal reforms or other measures needed
to achieve these aims appeared to have been
initiated by the end of the year, although the
Minister of Justice ruled in May that women
must be given a copy of their marriage
certificate, which is required in case of legal
disputes between spouses. The Shura
Council debated a proposed law that, if
enacted, would allow women to obtain a
passport without the approval of a male
guardian.
In August, an online Twitter campaign
entitled “Saudi women demand the end of
guardianship” prompted tens of thousands of
women to express opposition to the system of
male guardianship. Activists reported that by
September an estimated 14,000 Saudi
Arabian women had signed an online petition
calling on King Salman to abolish the system.
On 11 December, Malak al-Shehri was
detained and interrogated after she posted a
picture of herself on social media without an
abaya (full-length garment). She was
released on 16 December, but her legal
status remained unclear.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The authorities maintained their crackdown
on irregular migrants, arresting, detaining
and deporting hundreds of thousands of
migrant workers.
Tens of thousands of migrant workers were
laid off without having been paid for months,
after the government cut spending on
contracts with construction and other
companies. Indian, Pakistani, Filipino and
other foreign nationals were left stranded
without food, water or exit visas; some took to
the streets to block roads in protest.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to impose death sentences
for a range of crimes, including non-violent
drugs offences which, under international
law, should not incur the death penalty. Many
315defendants were sentenced to death after
unfair trials by courts that convicted them
without adequately investigating their
allegations that their “confessions” were
coerced, including with torture.
On 2 January the authorities carried out 47
executions, reportedly 43 by beheading and
four by shooting, in 12 locations around
the country.
Those facing execution included juvenile
offenders, including four Shi’a men
sentenced to death for participating in
protests in 2012 when they were under 18.
SENEGAL
Republic of Senegal
Head of state: Macky Sall
Head of government: Mohammed Dionne
The authorities continued to restrict the
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and
expression. Prisons remained overcrowded.
Although several police officers were
convicted of unlawful killings, impunity
remained a concern. Men and women faced
arrest because of their real or perceived
sexual orientation. Despite efforts to reduce
the number of children begging on the
streets, impunity for child exploitation and
child abuse persisted.
BACKGROUND
In May the capital, Dakar, hosted the
Extraordinary African Chambers which
sentenced former Chadian President Hissène
Habré to life imprisonment after he was
found guilty of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and torture committed in Chad
between 1982 and 1990.
Amendments to the Constitution were
adopted following a referendum in March,
including one which reduced the presidential
mandate to five years.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities banned peaceful
demonstrations and arrested demonstrators.
316
In October, the security forces fired tear
gas to disperse a peaceful demonstration
organized by the opposition. The Prefect of
Dakar had justified a decision to impose an
alternative route on the march on the basis of
a 2011 decree banning all assemblies in
parts of the city centre.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and artists who expressed dissent,
including through their choice of clothing,
were subjected to intimidation, harassment
and arbitrary detention.
In February, Mamadou Mouth Bane,
journalist and President of the social
movement Jubanti, was detained for more
than 12 hours at the Police Department of
Criminal Investigation for comments deemed
“seditious” made on television in the run-up
to a constitutional referendum. He was later
released without charge.
In June, rapper Ramatoulaye Diallo, also
known as Déesse Major, was detained for
three days and charged with
“indecency” and “offending moral principles”
for her choice of clothing in videos posted on
social media. All charges were dropped and
she was released.
At least two people were detained in Dakar
for insulting religion.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
The National Assembly adopted amendments
to the Criminal Code and the Code of
Criminal Procedure which could be used to
stifle dissent. The amendments provide
vague and broad definitions of terrorism-
related offences, criminalize the production
and dissemination of “immoral material”
online and empower the authorities to restrict
access to “illicit content” online.
Amendments to the Code of Criminal
Procedure violated the right to personal
liberty by extending to 12 days the period
that people can be detained before appearing
before a judge in terrorism-related cases. The
amendments also undermined the right to
fair trial by failing to provide that people
should have access to a lawyer as soon as
they are deprived of their liberty.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17At least 30 people were in detention for
terrorism-related offences. Several detainees
raised concerns about the conditions of their
arrest and detention. For example, Imam
Ndao, who remained in pre-trial detention
throughout the year on various charges
including “acts of terrorism” and “glorifying
terrorism”, was only allowed out of his cell for
30 minutes a day.
PRISON CONDITIONS AND
DEATHS IN CUSTODY
Prisons remained overcrowded. Some 2,090
people were held in Rebeuss Prison in Dakar,
which has a maximum capacity of 1,600.
At least six people died in custody in 2016,
including a detainee who was shot during a
mutiny at Rebeuss Prison in September.
Forty-one others were wounded, including 14
prison guards.
IMPUNITY
After protracted legal proceedings, there were
breakthroughs in four cases of unlawful
killings by the security forces. However, no
commanding officers were held to account
for failing to prevent excessive use of force
and no one was brought to justice for the
dozens of other cases of torture, unlawful
killings and deaths in custody since 2007.
In January, the driver of the police vehicle
that killed student Mamadou Diop during a
peaceful pre-election demonstration in 2012
was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment
and fined for “assault causing death” and
“intentional assault and battery.” The co-
driver was sentenced to three months’
imprisonment for “failure to prevent a crime
against physical integrity”. The court also
ordered the two policemen to pay damages to
Mamadou Diop’s relatives.
In June, a policeman who shot Bassirou
Faye during a peaceful demonstration at the
University Cheikh Anta Diop in Dakar in
August 2014 was found guilty of murder and
sentenced to 20 years’ hard labour and
ordered to pay damages to Bassirou Faye’s
family.
In June, a policeman was sentenced to
two years’ imprisonment in connection with
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
the killing of Ndiaga Ndiaye, also known as
Matar Ndiaye, who died after being shot in
the leg during a police operation in 2015.
In July, four policemen were convicted of
the killing of Ibrahima Samb in 2013 and
sentenced to 10 years’ hard labour. Ibrahima
Samb suffocated after the officers locked him
in the trunk of a car for over 16 hours.
DISCRIMINATION –
SEXUAL ORIENTATION
At least seven men and one woman were
detained in relation to their perceived sexual
orientation.
In January, the Dakar Court of Appeal
acquitted seven men of “acts against
nature.” They had been arrested in July 2015
and sentenced in August 2015 to 18 months’
imprisonment with 12 months suspended.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In July, the government launched an
operation to remove children from the streets.
However, the authorities continued to fail to
fully implement laws criminalizing child
exploitation and abuse, with few cases
investigated or prosecuted.
SERBIA
Republic of Serbia, including Kosovo
Head of state: Tomislav Nikolić
Head of government: Aleksandar Vučić
Pro-government media continued to smear
independent journalists and human rights
defenders, as well as the Ombudsperson’s
Office. Prosecutions of crimes under
international law committed during the
armed conflict in the 1990s remained
stalled. Several forced evictions took place
in Belgrade. Refugees and migrants
stranded in Serbia on their way to the EU
lacked access to protection and essential
services.
BACKGROUND
Early elections in April increased the majority
of the Serbian Progressive Party led by Prime
317Minister Aleksandar Vučić, who retained his
position as head of government.
CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
Prosecutions of war crimes and crimes
against humanity continued to stall as the
position of chief war crimes prosecutor
remained vacant throughout the year. In
March, the Prosecutor’s Office confirmed the
indictment of eight former members of the
Special Brigade of the Ministry of the Interior
of Republika Srpska, the ethnic Serb party to
the war in Bosnia, for war crimes committed
against civilians in Srebrenica in 1995.
Also in March, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia acquitted
Vojislav Šešelj, President of the Serbian
Radical Party. He had been indicted on three
counts of crimes against humanity
(persecution, deportation and inhumane acts
of forcible transfer) and six counts of war
crimes (murder, torture and cruel treatment,
wanton destruction, destruction or wilful
damage done to institutions dedicated to
religion or education and plunder of public or
private property). The prosecution lodged an
appeal which was pending at the end of the
year. Following the April elections, Vojislav
Šešelj returned to the National Assembly.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Proceedings against Radomir Marković,
former head of state security, and three
former security service officers for the murder
in April 1999 of journalist Slavko Ćuruvija
were stalled as a key witness failed to appear
at court.
Independent journalist associations
registered dozens of incidents targeting
journalists, including physical assaults and
death threats.
HOUSING RIGHTS
More than 200 families had been evicted in
central Belgrade since the beginning of works
in 2015 making way for the construction of
the Belgrade Waterfront site. In April, a
forced eviction was carried out at night by 30
masked men, who violently destroyed
residents’ homes. Local police were alerted
318
but refused to intervene. The Ombudsperson
and activist groups condemned these acts;
several protests were held calling for the
municipal and state authorities to be held
accountable. The Minister of the Interior
subsequently sued a newspaper for
defamation for alleging that he and the
Ministry were responsible for failing to act
during the demolitions. In late November, the
court upheld the allegations and ordered the
newspaper to pay the minister compensation
of RSD 300,000 (€2,400).
Following her mission to Serbia the UN
Special Rapporteur on the right to adequate
housing highlighted the deplorable situation
of people, in particular Roma, living in
informal settlements without access to
essential services. As well as calling for a
housing law to prohibit forced evictions and
an end to discrimination, the Special
Rapporteur stressed the need to prioritize
addressing insecure tenure and the lack of
access to public services for those without a
registered residence.
A draft law regulating evictions and
resettlement was passed at the end of the
year.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 120,000 refugees and migrants
travelled through Serbia on their way to the
EU. This significant decrease compared to
2015 was in part due to the closure of
borders to irregular migrants in the south and
north. Serbia’s refusal to provide beds to
accommodate more than 6,000 people on
the move at any one time resulted in
thousands being stranded in informal
makeshift camps in appalling conditions at
the border with Hungary, in derelict buildings
and parks in Belgrade and other locations
across the country. Infections and serious
diseases among refugees and migrants were
reported by volunteer groups and medical
organizations.
In November, the Ministry of Labour and
Employment, which is responsible for
organizing accommodation and care for
refugees and migrants, informed groups
providing support that they should cease all
Amnesty International Report 2016/17activity outside the formal reception centres,
which were overcrowded and mostly
unsuitable for long-term accommodation.
Many refugees and migrants were
subsequently evicted and returned to the
south, where they remained at risk of
unlawful and summary return to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and to
Bulgaria.
Serbia failed to provide access to a fair and
individualized asylum process for the vast
majority of registered asylum-seekers,
including refugee status determination
procedures, and considered itself to be a
country of transit towards the EU. Serbian
asylum authorities allowed most asylum-
seekers to remain in accommodation centres
while waiting to enter Hungary on the basis of
an informal waiting list co-ordinated between
the asylum-seekers and the Serbian and
Hungarian authorities respectively. Some of
the nominally open accommodation centres
restricted the free movement of asylum-
seekers and were effectively places where
people were being arbitrarily detained.
International border police patrols
operated at the borders with Macedonia and
Bulgaria from 22 July onwards. This
dramatically reduced the number of refugees
and migrants arriving in Serbia. According to
the Ministry of Defence, by the end of
November, over 16,000 people had been
prevented from entering the country. The
authorities failed to deploy adequately trained
civilian personnel along with border guards in
a systematic way to ensure that the intention
to claim asylum could be declared at the
border, as required by Serbian and
international law.
The Serbian authorities upheld the
suspension of a re-admission agreement with
its northern neighbour, Hungary. Thousands
returned by the Hungarian authorities despite
the suspension remained stranded in Serbia
without legal status or access to basic
services.
Over 12,000 asylum applications were
submitted between January and the end of
the year, but only 74 decisions were issued
by the end of October: 17 applicants were
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
granted refugee status and 17 were given
subsidiary protection while 40 asylum
applications were rejected. Almost half of all
asylum applications were filed by children.
KOSOVO
A Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the EU and Kosovo entered into
force in April. In November, the first Council
between the two parties was held, paving the
way for Kosovo’s future accession to the EU.
The de facto administration of Kosovo
continued to be implemented by the Kosovo
authorities jointly with the EU Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX). Progress in the EU-
facilitated dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo remained limited.
Access to justice
In June, the Human Rights Advisory Panel
(HRAP) of the UN Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) issued a scathing final report,
condemning the UN mission for its overall
failure to ensure accountability for human
rights violations committed under UNMIK’s
mandate and for failing to follow any of its
recommendations.
Crimes under international law
The mandate of EULEX was extended until
June 2018. However, the EU Rule of Law
Mission announced it would not launch new
investigations into cases of crimes under
international law. At the end of the year,
hundreds of pending cases were due to be
transferred to the Kosovo authorities despite
the European Commission declaring the
Kosovo judiciary “slow” and “vulnerable to
undue political influence”.
The Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
remained understaffed and struggled to
recruit adequately trained and experienced
prosecutors to investigate and prosecute
crimes under international law and to launch
new investigations.
The Kosovo Specialist Chambers, a
relocated special court to prosecute former
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA), was set up in The Hague. At the end
of the year, the first indictments by the
319Specialist Prosecutor had yet to be issued.
The Council of the EU allocated €29 million
to support the setting up and functioning of
the relocated judicial proceedings between
April 2016 and June 2017.
In January, Oliver Ivanović, leader of a
Kosovo Serb political party, was sentenced by
a panel of international judges at the Basic
Court of Mitrovicë/Mitrovica to nine years’
imprisonment for ordering the murder of
ethnic Albanians in the town in April 1999.
He remained under house arrest at the end
of the year while his appeal against his
conviction was pending before the Court of
Appeals in Pristinë/Pristina.
Enforced disappearances
Over 1,600 people remained missing in the
aftermath of the armed conflict. No further
grave sites were identified in Serbia or Kosovo
despite exhumations at potential mass
graves. Co-operation agreements between
the two parties remained unimplemented.
Discrimination – Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities
continued to suffer institutional
discrimination, in particular in accessing
sustainable solutions for housing and
employment, as internally displaced persons
(IDPs). These communities continued to live
in overcrowded conditions in informal
settlements without adequate access to water
and other essential services.
In February, the HRAP issued its opinion
on a complaint brought to it by Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian families who had
suffered lead poisoning in a UN-run camp for
IDPs in the northern town of Mitrovicë/
Mitrovica. The HRAP found that the UN
Mission had subjected the families to
inhuman and degrading treatment, failed to
respect their rights to respect for private and
family life and to health and discriminated
against them on the grounds of their ethnic
background. The HRAP found the UN action
to have been particularly detrimental for
women and children who were exposed to
multiple discrimination. It called on UNMIK
to publicly acknowledge the failure to comply
320
with human rights standards and, among
other measures, to pay adequate
compensation to the families. By the end of
the year, UNMIK had not implemented the
HRAP’s recommendations.
SIERRA LEONE
Republic of Sierra Leone
Head of state and government: Ernest Bai Koroma
Sierra Leone agreed to ratify several
international human rights treaties, but did
not accept a number of recommendations
made during the UN Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) process. Unwarranted
restrictions on the freedoms of expression,
peaceful assembly and association
continued to be imposed. Violence against
women and girls was widespread and
pregnant girls were excluded from school,
including exams. Disputes over land use
caused growing tensions.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
After undergoing its second UPR in April,
Sierra Leone accepted 177 of 208
recommendations. 1 These included ratifying
international human rights treaties, such as
Optional Protocols to the ICCPR, the ICESCR,
the Convention against Torture and CEDAW.
Sierra Leone agreed to repeal or revise laws
used to restrict freedom of expression and
association, but refused to prohibit by law
female genital mutilation (FGM), to allow
pregnant girls to attend school or to
guarantee the human rights of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex people. 2
In September, Sierra Leone was reviewed by
the Committee on the Rights of the Child,
which made various recommendations
regarding addressing sexual exploitation and
FGM.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
Unwarranted restrictions on freedom of
expression, assembly and association
continued to be imposed.
On 27 April, Independence Day, 29 people
were arrested and detained for over a week
following a parade organized by the
opposition Sierra Leone People’s Party
(SLPP). Police said the parade was
unauthorized and used tear gas to stop it.
Several people were injured, including the
women’s leader Lulu Sheriff. In August, six of
the 29 were sentenced to six months’
imprisonment, and one to nine months’
imprisonment, on charges including unlawful
procession and riotous conduct. They
appealed against their conviction. The trial of
the others continued.
The trial of 15 members of the SLPP and a
senior officer from the Human Rights
Commission arrested in the town of Kenema
on Independence Day in 2015 following a
protest had not concluded by the end of
2016.
In July, police refused permission for
women’s groups to assemble outside a
conference centre in the capital, Freetown,
during the Constitutional Review process to
request greater protection of gender rights in
the draft Constitution.
On 24 July, journalist Sam Lahai was
detained for two days by police after raising
questions on social media about the role of
the Deputy Internal Affairs Minister. He was
released on police bail after intervention by
the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists,
which had been calling for reform of
restrictive criminal libel laws for many years.
In August, two people were shot dead and
several injured by police in Kabala during a
protest against the loss of a planned youth
training centre. A curfew was imposed after
several buildings were burned down.
Seventeen people were sent to trial for
offences such as arson and riotous conduct.
The recently formed Independent Police
Complaints Board launched an investigation
into allegations that police used excessive
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
force. Its recommendations to the Director of
Public Prosecutions and the Inspector
General of Police were not made public.
NGO Policy Regulations were proposed
containing provisions which human rights
defenders said would restrict their activities.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The incidence of violence against women and
girls remained high. Specialist organizations
providing support to women and girls risked
closure due to funding constraints.
In March, President Koroma refused to
sign a bill legalizing abortion in certain
situations, despite the fact that it had been
adopted by Parliament twice. 3
Sierra Leone had a very high rate of FGM.
During the Ebola crisis, FGM was banned
and this ban was not officially lifted during
2016. However, FGM of young girls and
women remained common.
In September, a woman in her late 20s
was subjected to FGM and locked in a house
for four days in Kenema. She was rescued by
the police and went into hiding. The woman
accused of cutting her was detained by
police but released after several cutters
mounted a protest outside the police station.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Pregnant girls were banned from attending
mainstream school and sitting exams, in
violation of their rights to education and non-
discrimination. Pregnant girls could only
participate in a part-time “temporary
alternative education scheme” offering a
reduced curriculum. This temporary scheme
ended in August but was expected to
continue under a new scheme. Many girls
who had given birth were unable to pay
school fees to return to school. 4
In September, the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child urged Sierra Leone to
immediately lift the discriminatory ban on
pregnant girls attending mainstream schools
and sitting exams, and ensure that they and
adolescent mothers are supported to
continue their education in mainstream
schools. 5
321LAND DISPUTES
There were growing tensions over land-
related issues. In February, six people were
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment or
fines for destroying palm oil trees during
protests in the Pujehun District in 2013
against a palm oil project operated by Socfin.
Landowners claimed that they had not given
consent to the acquisition of their land.
In February, the High Court ordered a
Chinese company, Orient Agriculture Limited,
to restore 1,486 acres of land to about 70
families in Nimiyama Chiefdom, Kono
District. The company had signed a deal in
2013 with the Paramount Chief and local
leaders to purchase land cheaply without the
knowledge of the landowners.
1. Sierra Leone: Amnesty International Submission to the UN Universal
Periodic Review (AFR 51/2905/2015)
2. Sierra Leone must protect and promote women’s and girls‘ human
rights, including to education and physical integrity (AFR
51/4353/2016)
3. Sierra Leone: Sign bill allowing safe abortions (News story, 4
February)
4. Sierra Leone: Continued pregnancy ban in schools and failure to
protect rights is threatening teenage girls’ futures (News story, 8
November)
5. Sierra Leone: Submission to the Committee on the Rights of the Child
(AFR 51/4583/2016)
SINGAPORE
Republic of Singapore
Head of state: Tony Tan Keng Yam
Head of government: Lee Hsien Loong
The authorities continued to harass and
prosecute bloggers and dissidents. Media
remained heavily regulated through the
Newspaper and Printing Presses Act.
Judicial caning and the death penalty
continued to be applied.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Political activists, bloggers and government
critics faced prosecution and other reprisals
322
for the peaceful exercise of their rights to
freedom of expression and of peaceful
assembly.
There were concerns that the
Administration of Justice (Protection) Act,
passed in August, could target human rights
defenders for criticizing the courts or the
administration of justice. Punishments for
contempt of court offences included up to
three years’ imprisonment and fines of up to
SG$100,000 (US$70,000).
In June, blogger and political activist Han
Hui was convicted of illegal assembly and
“causing a public nuisance”; this prevented
her from running in parliamentary elections.
She was fined SG$3,100 (US$2,281), for
leading a peaceful protest in 2014 in Hong
Lim Park, the only space where people were
permitted to demonstrate without a police
permit. She appealed the decision. 1
Also in June, political activists Roy Ngerng
and Teo Soh Lung were subjected to hours of
investigation for Facebook postings on a by-
election “cooling off” day, which prohibits
campaigning on the eve of elections. 2
In September, Amos Yee, a teenage
blogger, was sentenced to six weeks’
imprisonment for uploading videos in which
he allegedly “wounded the religious feelings
of others”. 3
There were concerns that a decision by
the Court of Appeal to prohibit human rights
lawyer M. Ravi from practising law for a
further two years, may have been politically
motivated.
DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed
and carried out. In June, Kho Jabing, a
Malaysian national convicted of murder, was
executed hours after his final appeal was
rejected. The mandatory death penalty
remained applicable for a range of offences,
some of which did not meet the threshold of
“most serious crimes” under international
law.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Concerns remained about the Internal
Security Act (ISA) which allows the detention
Amnesty International Report 2016/17of suspects without trial for indefinitely
renewable two-year periods. Fifty-eight
people were said to have been detained
under the ISA since January 2015.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Section 377A of the Penal Code, which
criminalizes consensual sexual relations
between men, remained. In June, the Home
Affairs Ministry called on corporate sponsors
to rescind sponsorship of the Pink Dot
festival, an annual LGBTI gathering.
1. Singapore: End harassment of peaceful protesters (ASA
36/4342/2016)
2. Singapore: Government critics, bloggers and human rights defenders
penalized for speaking out (ASA 36/4216/2016)
3. Singapore: Blogger faces up to three years in prison (ASA
36/4685/2016)
SLOVAKIA
Slovak Republic
Head of state: Andrej Kiska
Head of government: Robert Fico
Discrimination against Roma continued and
little progress was made towards realizing
Roma pupils’ right to education. Slovakia
continued to be the subject of a race
equality infringement procedure by the
European Commission.
BACKGROUND
In March, Prime Minister Fico’s party,
Direction-Social Democracy, won the
parliamentary elections, while losing its
overall majority, and formed a four-party
coalition government. The far-right party,
People’s Party – Our Slovakia, entered
Parliament for the first time with 14 seats. On
1 July, Slovakia assumed the rotating six-
month Presidency of the Council of the EU.
DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
Police and security forces
There was concern over the continued lack of
effective investigation and lengthy
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
proceedings in several cases of excessive use
of force by police against Roma. In July, the
European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) found that Slovakia had failed to
adequately investigate allegations of police ill-
treatment of a Roma man in detention in
2010.
In August, the government announced that
the Law on Police would be amended to
move the Department of Control and
Inspection Service (SKIS) under the
Prosecutor General’s office – rather than it
being under the Ministry of Interior – in order
to increase SKIS’ independence. However, a
fully independent and transparent police
accountability mechanism was not in place at
the end of the year.
Several investigations into police ill-
treatment of Roma were pending at the end
of the year. In November, the investigation by
the SKIS into the alleged excessive use of
force by police during an operation in the
Roma settlement of Vrbnica in April 2015
resulted in criminal charges being brought
against the police officer who led the raid.
However, the SKIS found that there was
insufficient evidence to charge other police
officers involved; the decision was appealed
by the Roma families in December.
SKIS’ investigation into police officers’
conduct during an operation in the Roma
settlement at Moldava nad Bodvou in June
2013 was discontinued in March 2016. The
victims, supported by the European Roma
Rights Centre and the Centre for Civil and
Human Rights, appealed against this
decision; the case was pending before the
Constitutional Court at the end of the year.
Following the Public Prosecutor’s appeal,
the acquittal of 10 police officers accused of
ill-treatment of six Roma boys at a police
station in Košice in 2009 was quashed in
April and the case sent back to the District
Court.
Right to education
An amendment to the Schools Act prohibiting
the placement of children from socially
disadvantaged backgrounds in “special”
323schools solely based on their socioeconomic
background came into force in January.
However, Roma children continued to be
over-represented in “special” schools and
classes for children with “mild mental
disabilities” and were placed in ethnically
segregated mainstream schools and classes.
Despite ongoing infringement proceedings,
initiated by the European Commission in
2015 against Slovakia for breaching the
prohibition of discrimination set out in the EU
Racial Equality Directive in relation to the
access to education of Roma, there was no
evidence of the government taking any
effective measures to prevent or tackle the
issue. This was highlighted by the European
Commission in its annual assessment of
Roma integration plans, as well as by the UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child.
A public interest case, initiated in 2015 by
the Centre for Civil and Human Rights
against the Ministry of Education and the
municipality of Stará Ľubovňa for the
segregation of Roma children at a primary
school, was dismissed by the District Court in
Bratislava on 6 October 2016. The Centre
appealed against the decision; the case was
pending at the end of the year.
individuals suspected of terrorism-related
offences.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Despite placing “sustainable migration” high
on its agenda during its EU presidency,
Slovakia continued to oppose mandatory
relocation quotas for refugees from other EU
member states but expressed a willingness to
accept 100 refugees from Greece and Italy
by the end of 2017 on a voluntary basis. Only
three families were relocated from Greece by
the end of the year.
DISCRIMINATION
In August, the Slovak National Centre for
Human Rights and the State Trade
Inspectorate concluded that the owners of a
guesthouse in Bratislava discriminated
against three Turkish students. The owners
had rejected their booking request based on
a policy of “not accepting people from Turkey
or Arab countries due to security reasons”.
Prime Minister Fico continued to publicly
associate Muslims and refugees with
terrorism and used anti-migrant rhetoric. The
People’s Party – Our Slovakia organized anti-
Roma and anti-immigration marches in
January, March, June, July and October.
Forced sterilization
In February, the Košice II District Court ruled
that the Louis Pasteur University Hospital in
Košice unlawfully subjected a Roma woman
to a forced sterilization in 1999. The woman
had been subjected to the procedure without
her informed consent after giving birth
through a caesarean section. It took Slovak
courts over 10 years to conclude the case
and award the victim €17,000 in
compensation. An appeal by the hospital was
pending at the end of the year. SLOVENIA
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Anti-terrorism provisions introduced into the
Constitution, the Criminal Code and the
Criminal Procedure Code, as well as several
other laws, came into force in January. They
include the extension of the maximum period
of pre-charge detention to 96 hours for Before the closure of the Western Balkans
route in March, 99,187 refugees and
migrants entered Slovenia; the vast majority
of them passed through on their way to
Austria. 1,308 people – most of them Syrian,
Afghan and Iraqi nationals – applied for
asylum. After the closure of the Western
324
Republic of Slovenia
Head of state: Borut Pahor
Head of government: Miro Cerar
Asylum procedures were slow. The
International Protection Act was amended
to introduce expedited border procedures.
Discrimination against Roma continued.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Balkans route, those who entered Slovenia
and did not apply for asylum, including
minors, were detained in the Centre for
Foreigners in Postojna. In July, the authorities
offered alternative accommodation for
unaccompanied minors.
The asylum procedures were slow, partly
as a result of the authorities’ limited capacity
to process applications. Throughout the year,
more than 100 asylum-seekers, including
unaccompanied minors, waited for first
instance decisions for more than six months.
In March, the National Assembly amended
the International Protection Act, introducing
expedited asylum procedures for those who
expressed the intention to apply for asylum at
Slovenia’s border or in transit areas at
airports or ports. The law also removed the
right to financial assistance of €288 in the
first month after international protection has
been granted.
Slovenia received 124 asylum-seekers
relocated from Greece and Italy under the EU
relocation scheme by the end of the year, out
of a total of 567 asylum-seekers it had
committed to accept by the end of 2017. related rights since the expiry of the Legal
Status Act in 2013.
In November, the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) dismissed the
complaint against Slovenia of some of the
“erased” whose legal status had already been
regulated. However, additional human rights
issues of the “erased” remained pending
before the ECtHR at the end of the year.
DISCRIMINATION In April, Parliament adopted the Law on
Partnerships. The new law offers same-sex
couples the same rights as those originating
from marriage, but fails to guarantee the right
to adopt and to access assisted reproductive
services procedures.
In April, the National Assembly passed the
Protection against Discrimination Act,
harmonizing legislation with EU anti-
discrimination law. The law represented a
milestone in combating discrimination based
on gender identity, gender expression, social
status or health, among other things. The law
strengthened the mandate and autonomy of
the Advocate of the Principle of Equality – a
special post designed to prevent and
eliminate discrimination including by hearing
cases and offering assistance to victims of
discrimination – as an independent anti-
discrimination body.
The “erased”
Long-standing human rights violations
against the “erased” − former permanent
residents of Slovenia originating from other
former Yugoslav republics − persisted. No
new options were offered to the remaining
“erased” to restore their legal status and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Roma
Discrimination against and social exclusion of
the majority of Roma continued. Many were
living in segregated settlements in inadequate
housing, lacking security of tenure and
access to water, electricity, sanitation and
public transport. After the expiry of the
National Action Programme for Roma
inclusion in 2015, the government started a
process of adopting a new set of measures.
The government had yet to adopt a
comprehensive national Roma Strategy as
recommended by the parliamentary
commission for human rights.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In November, the Constitution was amended
to include the right to drinking water.
According to the amendment, water
resources are to be used primarily to supply
the population with drinking water and
households with water. The Constitution
stated that those water resources could not
be transformed from a public good into
a tradeable commodity.
325SOMALIA
Federal Republic of Somalia
Head of state: Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
Head of government: Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke
Head of Somaliland Republic: Ahmed Mohamed
Mahamoud Silyano
Armed conflict continued in central and
southern Somalia between Somali Federal
Government (SFG) forces, African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
peacekeepers, and the armed group al-
Shabaab. The areas controlled by SFG and
AMISOM forces in the south-central regions
remained in their hands. More than 50,000
civilians were killed, injured or displaced as
a result of the armed conflict and
generalized violence. All parties to the
conflict were responsible for violations of
human rights and international
humanitarian law, some amounting to war
crimes. There was no accountability for
these violations. Armed groups continued to
conscript children, and abduct, torture and
unlawfully kill civilians. Rape and other
crimes of sexual violence were widespread.
The continuing conflict, insecurity and
restrictions imposed by the warring parties
hampered aid agencies’ access to some
regions. About 4.7 million people needed
humanitarian assistance; 950,000 suffered
from food insecurity. Tens of thousands of
people were forcibly evicted from their
homes. Freedom of expression was
curtailed: two journalists were killed and
others were attacked, harassed or fined.
BACKGROUND
The SFG and AMISOM remained in control of
the capital, Mogadishu. They also retained
areas taken from al-Shabaab in 2015 and
consolidated their control through the federal
administrations in Galmudug, Jubbaland and
South-West states. AMISOM and the Somali
National Armed Forces (SNAF) fought
intermittent battles with al-Shabaab but
control of territory did not change. By the end
of 2016, al-Shabaab still controlled many
326
rural areas, especially in Bay, Gedo, Lower
Shabelle and Middle Juba regions. The
fighting displaced more people. Inter-clan
clashes and al-Shabaab attacks against
civilians continued, particularly in districts
where control repeatedly shifted between
AMISOM and al-Shabaab. Civilians were
killed and wounded in crossfire and targeted
attacks, and as a result of grenades,
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), suicide
attacks and complex assaults. All parties to
the conflict committed war crimes.
UN Security Council Resolution 2275,
passed in March, extended the mandate of
the UN Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) until 31 March 2017, while
Resolution 2297, passed in July, extended
the mandate of AMISOM until 31 May 2017.
International support for government security
forces, allied militias and AMISOM continued.
As a result of pressure for accountability, nine
Ugandan soldiers serving under AMISOM
were sentenced to imprisonment for violating
the rules and regulations of peacekeeping.
An acute humanitarian situation persisted
and it was feared that the return of Somalis
from neighbouring countries would
exacerbate the crisis. At least 4.7 million
people (40% of the population) needed
support; most vulnerable were the more than
1.1 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs).
A political crisis emerged over the electoral
colleges for parliamentary and presidential
elections due in September and October
respectively. A forum set up by political
leaders eventually agreed that 275 electoral
colleges, each comprising 51 delegates
selected by clan elders, would each elect an
MP. Elections were scheduled for the lower
and upper houses of Parliament in
September and October respectively, but
were twice postponed. Meanwhile, al-
Shabaab rejected all forms of election,
intensified attacks and called on followers to
attack polling venues and kill clan elders,
government officials and MPs taking part in
the elections.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Indiscriminate attacks
Al-Shabaab carried out indiscriminate and
lethal attacks in heavily guarded areas of
Mogadishu and other towns, killing or injuring
hundreds of civilians. High-profile targets
remained vulnerable to such attacks. It was
difficult to establish the total number of
civilians killed because there was no reliable
casualty tracking system.
An al-Shabaab attack on Beach View Hotel
and Lido Seafood restaurant at Lido beach in
Mogadishu on 21 January killed at least 20
people. A suicide car bomb attack at a police
station in Mogadishu on 9 March killed at
least three people. A suicide bomb attack on
a restaurant near a local government building
in Mogadishu on 9 April killed at least four
people and wounded seven. A suicide car
bomb attack at Mogadishu’s traffic police
headquarters on 9 May killed at least five
people. An al-Shabaab attack on Nasa
Hablod Hotel in Mogadishu on 26 June killed
at least 15 people and injured more than 20.
Clashes between al-Shabaab fighters and
SNAF in Bay region on 18 July killed 14
civilians caught in the crossfire. Two car
explosions on 26 July outside a UN office in
Mogadishu killed at least 10 people, both
civilians and security officers. Two suicide
attacks on the local government
headquarters in Galkayo in Puntland (a semi-
autonomous region in the northeast) on 21
August killed at least 20 civilians. An al-
Shabaab attack on Banadir Beach
Restaurant at Lido beach in Mogadishu on
26 August killed at least 10 civilians. A truck
explosion outside SYL Hotel in Mogadishu
near the presidential palace on 30 August
killed at least 15 people and injured 45.
Targeting of civilians
Civilians were also directly targeted in
attacks, especially by al-Shabaab fighters and
clan militias. On 15 June, al-Shabaab fighters
fired mortars into densely populated areas of
Mogadishu; five loud explosions were heard
but no deaths were reported. On 6 August,
al-Shabaab fired mortar shells into a
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
neighbourhood near the general hospital in
Baidoa, killing one man and injuring six
others.
In addition, al-Shabaab continued to
torture and extrajudicially kill people they
accused of spying or not conforming to its
interpretation of Islamic law. The group killed
people in public, including by beheading and
stoning, and carried out amputations and
floggings, especially in areas from which
AMISOM had withdrawn. On 19 January, al-
Shabaab killed a man in Kurtuwary district
after accusing him of witchcraft. On 20 May,
al-Shabaab beheaded three men in Buur
Hakaba district in Bay region after accusing
them of spying for the federal government.
On 17 August, al-Shabaab publicly killed a
man by firing squad in Biyoley settlement,
near Baidoa, after accusing him of spying for
the federal government.
Clan and government-aligned militias
continued to carry out extrajudicial killings,
extortion, arbitrary arrests and rape. On 7
August, a clan militia in Qansax Dheere
district in Bay region fired mortar shells at
civilians, killing three. In August, several
civilians were killed during clan clashes in
Bay region.
CHILD SOLDIERS
Children continued to suffer grave abuses by
all parties to the armed conflict. Somalia is a
party to the UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child but the federal government had yet
to implement the two action plans it signed in
2012 to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, as well as the killing and maiming of
children.
In June, UNICEF stated that it believed
there were up to 5,000 child soldiers in
Somalia, mostly recruited by al-Shabaab and
clan militias.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE,
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
More than 1.1 million Somalis remained
internally displaced. Most continued to settle
along the Afgooye corridor between
Mogadishu and Afgooye town. Intermittent
clashes between SNAF and its AMISOM allies
327and al-Shabaab disrupted trade in various
regions. While SNAF and AMISOM forces
controlled major towns, al-Shabaab blocked
supply routes and taxed the civilian
population in districts that it controlled.
Continued conflict threatened to exacerbate
the dire humanitarian situation.
In January, the federal parliament passed
a law to protect and rehabilitate IDPs and
Somali refugees, but implementation of it was
slow. Over 1.1 million Somali refugees
remained in neighbouring countries and the
wider diaspora. As violence intensified in
Yemen, Somalis who had fled there
continued to return to Somalia. By the end of
the year, over 30,500 Somalis had done so.
Meanwhile, other host states, including
Denmark and the Netherlands, put pressure
on Somali asylum-seekers and refugees to
return to Somalia on the grounds that
security had improved in the country.
HOUSING RIGHTS – FORCED EVICTION
Forced evictions of IDPs and the urban poor
remained a major problem, especially in
Mogadishu. The government and private
landowners forcibly evicted nearly 31,000
people in Deynile, Dharkeinly, Hamar Weyne,
Heliwa, Hodan, Kaxda and Wardhigley
districts of Mogadishu in the first half of the
year. Over 14,000 people were forcibly
evicted in January alone. The majority of
those evicted moved to insecure and isolated
locations on the outskirts of the capital,
where social services were limited or non-
existent and living conditions were
deplorable.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and media workers continued to
be intimidated, harassed and attacked. Two
journalists were killed. On 4 June,
unidentified gunmen shot dead Sagal Salad
Osman, a journalist for state-run radio and
television. On 27 September in Mogadishu,
two assailants shot dead Abdiasis Mohamed
Ali of Radio Shabelle. Several media houses
were closed. On 9 July, police raided the
premises of City FM, shut down the radio
station and arrested the editor-in-chief,
328
Abdishakur Abdullahi Ahmed, and deputy
editor-in-chief, Abdirahman Hussein Omar
Wadani. They also confiscated radio
equipment. On 13 August, police in
Beledweyn region detained a freelance
journalist, Ali Dahir Herow. Al-Shabaab
continued to suppress the media and
retained a ban on the internet in areas under
its control.
In Somaliland, which lacks a functioning
media law to protect journalists, media
freedom was also restricted. The government
curtailed freedom of expression of those who
criticized its policies. By October, nine
journalists had been arrested in relation to
their work, seven of whom faced criminal
cases in courts. On 25 May, Ahmed Mouse
Sakaaro, a journalist based in Burao, was
arrested and charged with inciting violence.
In June, police officers arrested the publisher
of the independent Foore newspaper,
Abdirashid Abdiwahaab Ibraahim, and the
editor-in-chief, Mohamed Mahamoud Yousuf,
for covering an agreement on the
management of Berbera port between the
Somaliland government and a private
company based abroad. Also in May, two
journalists – Cabdirashid Nuur Wacays and
Siciid Khadar, publisher and editor-in-chief of
Hubsad newspaper respectively – were
arrested and the newspaper was closed
down. In addition, the government
suspended publication of Haartif newspaper,
a court revoked its licence and the police
occupied its premises.
DEATH PENALTY
Somalia continued to use the death penalty
despite its support for the UN General
Assembly resolution on a moratorium on the
death penalty. Few executions were reported,
but the Military Court did sentence people to
death in proceedings that fell short of
international fair trial standards. Among those
sentenced to death was a former journalist
accused of helping al-Shabaab to kill five
fellow reporters. On 14 August, a military
court in Puntland ordered the execution of an
army officer by firing squad in Garowe city. It
Amnesty International Report 2016/17was not known whether the execution was
carried out.
In Somaliland, six prisoners at the
Mandera maximum security complex were
executed in January. On 25 July, a civilian
court in Berbera sentenced eight men to
death. Civilian courts continued to impose
death sentences and at least 50 people were
on death row at the end of the year.
SOUTH AFRICA
Republic of South Africa
Head of state and government: Jacob G. Zuma
Police used excessive force against
protesters. Torture, including rape, and
other ill-treatment of people in police
custody continued to be reported.
Xenophobia and violence against refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants resulted in
deaths, injuries and displacement. Women
and girls, particularly those in marginalized
communities, continued to face gender
inequality and discrimination. Lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
people were subjected to discrimination and
hate crimes, including killings. Human
rights defenders were attacked.
BACKGROUND
Political violence erupted in KwaZulu-Natal
Province in the run-up to local elections held
on 3 August. Between January and July, 25
violent incidents were reported, including 14
murders of local councillors, election
candidates or members of political parties.
The Police Minister set up a task force to
investigate and prosecute incidents of
politically motivated crime in the province.
From July, widespread and often violent
student protests demanded free tertiary
education. The protests followed the
government’s announcement of fee increases
of up to 8% for the 2017 academic year.
Courts affirmed the independence of state
oversight institutions. On 31 March, the
Constitutional Court backed the findings of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
the Office of the Public Protector’s inquiry
into non-security upgrades at the President’s
personal residence, requiring him to pay
back the public funds used. On 6 September,
the Constitutional Court ruled that the Police
Minister’s decision to suspend Robert
McBride, Executive Director of the
Independent Police Investigative Directorate
(IPID), under the IPID Act was
unconstitutional. In November, charges of
fraud against Robert McBride were
withdrawn.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In response to the student protests, police
sometimes used excessive force, including
firing rubber bullets at close range at
students and supporters when the use of
force was neither necessary nor
proportionate.
On 11 December, President Zuma
announced steps taken by departments to
implement the recommendations of the
Farlam Commission of Inquiry into the police
killings of striking miners in Marikana in
2012. These included revising the protocols
governing the use of force, the launch on 15
April of a ministerial task force to ensure the
psychological and physical fitness of police
officers, and the setting up on 29 April of a
panel of experts to revise public order
policing processes. The Board of Inquiry into
the fitness of national Police Commissioner
Riah Phiyega to hold office concluded and
was due to submit its final report to
the President.
POLICE
The IPID reported 366 deaths as a result of
police action and 216 deaths in police
custody in 2015/2016, both figures lower
than for the previous year. It also reported
145 cases of torture, including 51 cases of
rape, by police officers on duty, and 3,509
cases of assault by police. Legal proceedings
relating to unlawful killings by police
remained slow.
In Durban High Court, the trial of 27 police
officers, most of them members of the now
disbanded Cato Manor Organized Crime Unit,
329on charges including 28 counts of murder,
was further delayed until 31 January 2017.
In October, the Public Protector issued a
report into violence at Durban’s Glebelands
hostel complex between March 2014 and
November 2016 during which over 60 people
died in targeted killings. The report found
that the conflict was a result of the
municipality’s failure to assume responsibility
for rental accommodation at the hostel. The
report highlighted the detention and torture
by police of at least three Glebelands
residents in 2014, with no action taken
against those suspected of criminal
responsibility. The IPID investigation into the
March 2014 death in custody of Zinakile
Fica, a Glebelands resident, was not
completed.
The Public Protector’s report also found
that the police failed in its duty to prevent
and investigate crime and to protect hostel
residents, highlighting the low ratio of arrests
and lack of successful prosecution of murder
suspects. The Public Protector promised to
monitor investigations of allegations of police
torture and killings of Glebelands residents.
In April, Glebelands residents submitted
an urgent appeal to the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, calling for
the UN Human Rights Council to intervene
regarding the targeted killings. On 7
November, a Glebelands peace committee
leader was shot dead after leaving Umlazi
Magistrate’s Court. No arrests have been
made.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
In October, the government submitted an
instrument of withdrawal from the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) without consulting Parliament. 1 The
withdrawal takes effect after one year. The
move followed non-co-operation procedures
by the ICC against South Africa after the
authorities failed to execute warrants of arrest
for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes against Sudanese President Omar
al-Bashir when he visited South Africa in
June 2015 to attend the African Union (AU)
summit. The move also followed the
330
dismissal by South Africa’s Supreme Court of
Appeal on 15 March of an appeal against the
2015 North Gauteng High Court judgment
that the failure to arrest President al-Bashir
violated South Africa’s Constitution. State
authorities had allowed President al-Bashir to
leave South Africa in contravention of an
interim order by North Gauteng High Court
that he must remain.
CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
New research concluded that the failure of
mining company Lonmin to address housing
conditions at Marikana contributed to the
events of August 2012, when police shot
dead 34 striking mineworkers. 2 Under its
legally binding 2006 Social and Labour Plan,
Lonmin had promised to construct 5,500
houses for mineworkers by 2011. It had built
only three by 2012. In August 2016, Lonmin
said that approximately 13,500 of its 20,000
permanent employees still needed formal
accommodation. Many mineworkers
continued to live in informal settlements such
as Nkaneng within Lonmin’s mine lease area.
The shacks in Nkaneng do not meet the most
basic international requirements for adequate
housing. As a result, Lonmin’s operations
were inconsistent with the right to an
adequate standard of living, including
adequate housing.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Xenophobia and violence against refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants continued,
resulting in deaths, injuries and
displacement. Many incidents involved the
targeted looting of foreign-owned small
businesses in townships.
In June, shops in Pretoria townships were
looted and at least 12 refugees and migrants
were seriously injured and hundreds
displaced. Earlier in the year, residents of
Dunoon in the Western Cape looted foreign-
owned businesses.
In April, findings were released of an
inquiry into the 2015 violence against
refugees, migrants and asylum-seekers in
KwaZulu-Natal Province. The inquiry found
the tensions were due to competition for
Amnesty International Report 2016/17scarce employment opportunities in the
context of poverty and socioeconomic
inequality. Its recommendations included
educating civil servants on the rights and
documentation of foreign nationals;
strengthening the capacities of institutions
managing migrants, refugees and asylum-
seekers; ensuring leaders make responsible
public statements; and education campaigns
in schools to promote cohesion.
The previous closure of three of six refugee
reception offices continued to put severe
pressure on refugees who must consequently
travel long distances to renew asylum
permits.
Draft legislation on international
immigration put forward in June includes a
security-based approach to asylum-seekers,
restricting their rights. It proposes asylum
processing and administrative detention
centres at South Africa’s borders. These
would house asylum-seekers while their
applications are processed and limit their
rights to work and movement while awaiting a
decision on their application.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Gender inequality and discrimination
continued to exacerbate the detrimental
impact of racial, social and economic
inequalities, especially for marginalized
groups of women and girls.
Nearly a third of pregnant women were
living with HIV, but improved access to free
anti-retroviral treatment for pregnant women
continued to reduce maternal mortality.
Department of Health figures showed that the
maternal mortality ratio continued to fall, from
197 for every 100,000 live births in 2011 to
155 in 2016. Problems persisted in rural
communities relating to the availability and
cost of transport for pregnant women and
girls needing to access health services. The
lives of pregnant women and girls continued
to be put at unnecessary risk due to barriers
to abortion services.
In June, the government launched a
campaign, She Conquers, to address the
disproportionately high rates of HIV infection
among girls and young women and to reduce
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
high levels of adolescent pregnancy.
Although focused on improving access to
health, education and employment
opportunities for girls, campaign messaging
was criticized for perpetuating negative
stereotypes of girls’ sexuality.
Also in June, the Commission for Gender
Equality found the requirement that girls
undergo virginity testing (ukuhlolwa) to
access tertiary education bursaries, as
imposed by a municipality in KwaZulu-Natal
Province, violated constitutional rights to
equality, dignity and privacy and would
perpetuate patriarchy and inequality in South
Africa. The ukuhlolwa requirement
was removed.
A report by the UN Special Rapporteur on
violence against women, its causes and
consequences issued in June called on
South Africa to implement a co-ordinated
approach to end the pandemic of gender-
based violence and discrimination, and
recommended the decriminalization of
sex work.
In March, the South African National AIDS
Council (SANAC) launched a plan to address
high rates of HIV among sex workers,
including access to pre-exposure prophylaxis
and anti-retroviral medicine. SANAC and sex
worker activists warned that South Africa’s
laws relating to “prostitution” risked
undermining the plan.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Hate crimes, hate speech and discrimination
against LGBTI people, including killings and
assaults, continued. Such attacks were
believed to be grossly under-reported
to police.
In March, Lucia Naido was stabbed to
death in Katlehong, Ekurhuleni. Katlehong
police opened a murder investigation, which
was ongoing.
In April, a young, openly gay man,
Tshifhiwa Ramurunzi, was attacked and
seriously injured in Thohoyandou, Limpopo
Province. His attacker was charged with
attempted murder.
331On 6 August, the body of Lesley
Makousaan, an openly gay 17-year-old
student, was found in Potchefstroom, North
West Province; he had been strangled. A
suspect was arrested shortly afterwards and
was awaiting trial.
The body of Noluvo Swelindawo, an openly
lesbian woman, was found in Khayelitsha,
Western Cape Province, on 4 December, the
day after she was kidnapped. A suspect was
arrested on charges including
housebreaking, kidnapping and murder, and
appeared in court on 7 December. On 21
December, the suspect withdrew his
bail application.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders were attacked for
carrying out their work, and justice for such
crimes was slow.
In March, land rights activist Sikhosiphi
“Bazooka” Rhadebe was shot dead at his
home in Lurholweni, Eastern Cape Province,
by two men claiming to be police officers. 3
He was Chairperson of the community-led
Amadiba Crisis Committee and opposed the
opencast mining of titanium and other heavy
minerals on communal land in Xolobeni by a
local subsidiary of Australia-based Mineral
Commodities Limited.
The trial of a police officer charged with
the October 2013 shooting and killing of 17-
year-old housing rights activist Nqobile Nzuza
during a protest in Cato Crest informal
settlement in Durban was scheduled to begin
in February 2017.
On 20 May, Durban High Court found two
councillors representing the ruling African
National Congress (ANC) and a co-accused
hit man guilty of murdering housing rights
activist Thulisile Ndlovu in September 2014.
The three were sentenced to life
imprisonment.
In a landmark judgment on 17 November,
Bloemfontein High Court upheld the appeal
by 94 community health workers and
Treatment Action Campaign activists who had
successfully challenged the constitutionality
of the use of apartheid-era legislation, the
1993 Regulation of Gatherings Act. The Act
332
criminalizes the gathering of more than 15
people in a public space without notifying the
police in advance. The judgment affirmed
that participating in a gathering without prior
notice is not an offence.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In June, three senior journalists of the South
African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC)
were summarily suspended, allegedly for
disagreeing with the decision not to cover a
peaceful protest against censorship and
abuse of power by the SABC, organized by
the advocacy organization Right2Know. When
five other SABC journalists objected to the
suspensions they were accused of
misconduct. All eight SABC employees were
then fired. The group filed a case with the
Constitutional Court in July, arguing that their
right to freedom of expression had been
violated; the case was pending. Four of the
journalists won a case at the Labour Court in
July that SABC had violated labour
procedures. The eight subsequently returned
to work but continued to face threats. On 12
December, four of the eight testified on
behalf of the group at Parliament’s inquiry
into the fitness of the SABC board.
Right2Know testified on 14 December.
DISCRIMINATION
People with albinism
Attacks against and the abduction of people
with albinism were reported.
Four-year-old Maneliswa Ntombel was
abducted by two men near his home on 21
June in KwaZulu-Natal Province. He
remained missing at the end of the year.
In February, Mtubatuba Regional Court
sentenced a 17-year-old youth to 18 years’
imprisonment for the murder of Thandazile
Mpunzi, who was killed in August 2015 in
KwaZulu-Natal Province. Her remains were
discovered in a shallow grave. Parts of her
body had been sold to traditional healers.
Two other men who pleaded guilty to the
murder had each been sentenced in
September 2015 to 20 years’ imprisonment.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Hate crime legislation
In October, the draft Hate Crimes Bill was
introduced. It aims to address racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and
discrimination based on gender, sex, sexual
orientation and other issues, by providing an
offence of hate crime. It includes
controversial provisions that criminalize hate
speech in ways that could be used to
impermissibly restrict the right to freedom of
expression.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Children with disabilities
Children with disabilities continued to face
multiple challenges of discrimination,
exclusion and marginalization which, among
other things, denied them equal access to
education despite legal and policy
frameworks guaranteeing inclusive
education. On 27 October, the
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
recommended a review of Education White
Paper No.6 to develop a framework for
inclusive education that would see expansion
of full-service schools and the inclusion of
children with disabilities in mainstream
education.
1. South Africa: Decision to leave International Criminal Court a “deep
betrayal of millions of victims worldwide” (News story, 21 October)
2. South Africa: Smoke and mirrors – Lonmin’s failure to address
housing conditions at Marikana (AFR 53/4552/2016)
3. South Africa: Human rights defenders under threat (AFR
53/4058/2016)
SOUTH SUDAN
Republic of South Sudan
Head of state and government: Salva Kiir Mayardit
Despite the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan (ARCSS), fighting continued
between government and opposition forces,
along with violations and abuses of
international human rights and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
humanitarian law. A Transitional
Government of National Unity (TGoNU) was
formed in April, but it fell apart following
heavy fighting between government and
opposition forces in Juba in July. The
reconstituted government in Juba was
accepted by the international community
but rejected by opposition leader Riek
Machar and his allies. The ongoing fighting
continued with devastating humanitarian
consequences for civilian populations.
Government security services actively
suppressed independent and critical voices
from the opposition, media and human
rights defenders.
BACKGROUND
Implementation of the ARCSS, the peace
agreement, was slow and faced numerous
hurdles including disagreement over the
number of states, the cantonment of
opposition fighters and security arrangements
in the capital Juba.
On 26 April, opposition leader Riek
Machar returned to Juba to be sworn in as
First Vice-President of the TGoNU, as
provided for in the ARCSS. Ministers of the
TGoNU were sworn in the following week.
In early July, a series of violent clashes
between government and opposition forces in
Juba heightened tensions and led to a deadly
shoot-out on 8 July between bodyguards of
President Salva Kiir and then First Vice-
President Riek Machar outside the
Presidential Palace, where the two were
meeting. On 10 and 11 July, there were
heavy clashes between government and
opposition forces in Juba.
The fighting in Juba forced Riek Machar
and opposition forces to flee southward,
where they evaded active pursuit by
government forces over the next month.
Meanwhile President Salva Kiir dismissed
Riek Machar as First Vice-President and
replaced him on 25 July with opposition
politician Taban Deng Gai. Riek Machar
rejected and denounced the dismissal which
resulted in a split in the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army/Movement in Opposition
(SPLM/A-IO). The international community
333eventually accepted the new government and
urged it to resume implementation of the
ARCSS.
Relative calm was restored in Juba
following the flight of Riek Machar and
opposition forces but the fighting in Juba
triggered a surge of violence in the southern
Equatoria region, resulting in killings of
civilians, looting, and arbitrary detentions.
Lainya, Yei, Kajokeji, Morobo and Maridi
counties were particularly affected. Between
July and December, more than 394,500
South Sudanese arrived in northern Uganda
as refugees as a result of the insecurity.
In September, the UN Security Council
(UNSC) adopted resolution 2304 authorizing
the establishment of a 4,000-member
Regional Protection Force (RPF), as an
addition to the existing 12,000 members of
the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
peacekeeping force. The RPF mandate
would be to facilitate safe movement in and
out of Juba; protect the airport and key
facilities in Juba; and engage any actor
preparing for or engaging in attacks against
civilians, humanitarian actors, or UN
personnel and premises. However, the RPF
was not in place by the end of the year.
The same resolution provided that the
UNSC would consider the imposition of an
arms embargo should South Sudan create
political or operational impediments to
operationalizing the RPF or obstruct UNMISS
in the performance of its mandate. Despite
reports of attacks on and obstruction of
UNMISS staff and the government’s
averseness to the RPF’s mandate and
establishment, in December the UN Security
Council failed to approve a resolution that
would have imposed an arms embargo.
INTERNAL ARMED CONFLICT
Despite the ARCSS, there was fighting in
many areas of the country throughout the
year. The fighting was continuously
accompanied by violations and abuses of
international human rights and humanitarian
law by parties to the conflict, including
killings, looting and destruction of civilian
property, abductions and sexual violence.
334
On 17 and 18 February, fighting took place
in the UN Protection of Civilians site in
Malakal, which housed around 45,000
people. Government soldiers entered the site
and participated in the fighting. Around one
third of the camp was burned to the ground,
and at least 29 internally displaced people
were killed.
In Western Bahr el Ghazal in early 2016,
government soldiers carried out attacks
against civilians: killings, torture including
rape, looting and burning down of civilian
homes. Clashes between government and
opposition allied forces in Wau town on
24-25 June displaced an estimated 70,000
people and killed dozens.
During the July fighting in Juba, armed
actors, particularly government soldiers,
committed violations and abuses of
international human rights and humanitarian
law, including killings, sexual violence, and
looting of civilian property and humanitarian
assets. Government soldiers also fired
indiscriminately near Protection of Civilians
sites and, in some cases, deliberately
targeted them. Fifty-four displaced people
were killed in the sites during the fighting,
according to the UN.
In September, the number of refugees who
had arrived in neighbouring countries since
the start of the conflict in December 2013,
reached 1 million. The number of internally
displaced people seeking protection in
Protection of Civilians sites rose over the
course of the year to 204,918 in October. A
total of 1.83 million people continued to be
displaced within the country and 4.8 million
people were affected by food insecurity.
ARBITRARY DETENTIONS AND TORTURE
AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
South Sudan’s National Security Service
(NSS) and the national army’s Military
Intelligence Directorate continued to conduct
arbitrary arrests, prolonged and – in some
cases – incommunicado detentions, and
enforced disappearances of perceived
government opponents. Detainees were
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment in
multiple detention facilities.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Over 30 men were detained by the NSS at
a two-storey detention facility within its
headquarters in the Jebel neighbourhood of
Juba. They were detained on accusations of
supporting the SPLM/A-IO, but were not
charged or presented in court. None of them
had had access to legal counsel by the end
of the year. The NSS restricted access to
family members and failed to provide
adequate medical care. Some were subjected
to beatings and other forms of physical
assault, especially during interrogation or as
punishment for breaking internal detention
rules. Some had been in detention for over
two years.
The NSS continued to arbitrarily detain
George Livio, a journalist with the UN’s Radio
Miraya, without charge or trial, in Juba. The
NSS arrested George Livio in Wau on 22
August 2014. The NSS has denied requests
from his lawyer to meet him and has
restricted his access to family members.
Loreom Joseph Logie, who had been
arbitrarily detained by the NSS since
September 2014, died on 17 July. Prior to his
death he had suffered from a tapeworm
infection that was untreated and caused
liver damage.
A detention facility at a military base in
Gorom, about 20km south of Juba, was used,
at least between November 2015 and May
2016, to detain soldiers and civilians
allegedly affiliated with the opposition.
Detainees were held without charge or trial.
They were held in poorly ventilated metal
shipping containers, fed only once or twice a
week and given insufficient drinking water.
Many detainees died at this facility due to
harsh conditions; others were victims of
extrajudicial executions.
The Giyada military barracks in Juba
remained a site where arbitrary and
incommunicado detentions, torture and
disappearances continued to be carried out.
Conditions were particularly harsh in an
underground military intelligence cell, where
detainees were held without access to natural
light or sanitary facilities.
Elias Waya Nyipouch, former Governor of
Wau state, was arrested at his home on 26
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
June. He was detained in Juba at the Giyada
military barracks and moved on 21 October
to the Bilpam barracks, also in Juba. He was
held without charge or trial at the end of
the year.
LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY
There were no credible investigations and
prosecutions of violations and abuses of
international human rights and humanitarian
law conducted in fair trials by civilian courts.
Some crimes committed against civilians by
government soldiers were reportedly
prosecuted before military courts, despite the
provision under South Sudan’s SPLA Act
providing that if military personnel commit an
offence against a civilian, the civil court
should assume jurisdiction over the offence.
Although the ARCSS provided for the
establishment of a Hybrid Court for South
Sudan by the African Union Commission,
little progress was made towards its
establishment. There was also little progress
towards the establishment of a Commission
on Truth Reconciliation and Healing or a
Compensation and Reparations Authority.
These two bodies were also provided for in
the ARCSS.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The space for journalists and human rights
defenders to work freely continued to shrink,
as it had since the start of the conflict. The
authorities, especially the NSS, continued to
harass and intimidate journalists, summoning
them for questioning and arbitrarily arresting
and detaining them. Numerous journalists
and human rights defenders have fled South
Sudan due to perceived security risks.
Joseph Afandi, a journalist in Juba with the
daily El Tabeer, was arrested by the NSS on
23 December 2015 for criticizing in an article
the human rights record of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM). He
was held in incommunicado detention at the
NSS headquarters in Juba until his release in
February. While in detention, he was
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment.
Alfred Taban, a journalist and chief editor
of the daily Juba Monitor, published an
335opinion piece on 15 July in which he said
that both Machar and Kiir had “completely
failed” and “should not remain in their
seats”. Alfred Taban was arrested the
following day by NSS agents and detained at
their headquarters in Juba for one week. He
was then transferred to police custody and
charged with “publishing or communicating
false statements prejudicial to South Sudan”
and with “undermining the authority of or
insulting the president.” He was released on
bail on 29 July. No court date had been set
for a trial by the end of the year.
On 12 September, staff of the newspaper
Nation Mirror were summoned by the NSS
and shown a letter ordering the paper to
“close down because they had indulged in
activities incompatible with their status.” The
order followed the publication of an opinion
article condemning corruption within the
armed forces and an article about corruption
allegations against government officials.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In February, two laws regulating NGOs
activities’ were enacted. The laws restricted
the right to freedom of association by
mandating that all NGOs needed to register;
non-registered NGOs were prohibited from
operating. The Relief and Rehabilitation
Commission held sweeping powers to register
and monitor NGOs and to revoke registration
of NGOs that were judged not to be in
conformity with the NGO Act. The acceptable
“objectives of NGOs” listed in the Act did not
include human rights work or policy
advocacy.
RIGHT TO HEALTH – MENTAL HEALTH
Although levels of post-traumatic stress
disorder and depression among the
population remained high, the availability and
accessibility of mental health and
psychosocial support services remained
limited. Juba Teaching Hospital – the only
public medical facility that provided
psychiatric care – still only had 12 beds in its
psychiatric ward. The availability of
psychotropic drugs was inconsistent and
limited. There were only two practising
336
psychiatrists in the country, both of whom
were in Juba. Neither of them saw patients
on a full-time basis. Due to the lack of
appropriate services and facilities, people
with mental health conditions continued to be
routinely housed in prisons, even if they had
not committed any crime. In prison, mental
health patients continued to receive
insufficient medical care and were
sometimes chained or held in solitary
confinement for long periods.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In May, South Sudan completed ratification of
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights and of the Organization of African
Unity Convention Governing the Specific
Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa.
SPAIN
Kingdom of Spain
Head of state: King Felipe VI de Borbón
Head of government: Mariano Rajoy
The offence of “glorifying terrorism”
continued to be used to prosecute people
peacefully exercising their right to freedom
of expression. New cases of torture and
other ill-treatment, excessive use of force
and collective expulsions by police officials
were reported, including against individuals
who attempted to enter irregularly from
Morocco into the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta
and Melilla. Investigations into allegations
of torture and other ill-treatment were
sometimes not effectively conducted.
Authorities accepted the resettlement and
relocation of only a few hundred refugees,
far below the commitments undertaken.
Spanish authorities continued to refuse to
co-operate with the Argentine judiciary to
investigate crimes committed during the
Civil War and by the Franco regime.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
Throughout the year, unwarranted restrictions
on the rights to freedom of expression,
information and assembly were imposed, on
the basis of the 2015 legislative amendments
to the Law on Public Security and the
Criminal Code.
On 5 February, Alfonso Lázaro de la
Fuente and Raúl García Pérez, professional
puppeteers, were imprisoned for five days
after performing a play which included
scenes in which a nun was stabbed, a judge
hanged and police and pregnant women
were subjected to beatings. During the show,
one of the puppets displayed a banner
bearing the sign “Gora ALKA-ETA” (“Up with
ALKA-ETA”). The puppeteers were charged
with glorifying terrorism and incitement to
hatred. Their arrest took place after several
individuals said they were offended by the
play. In September, the National Court
dismissed charges of glorifying terrorism.
However, at the end of the year, the
prosecution continued on charges of
incitement to hatred.
In April, the Minister of Interior urged the
General Council of the Judiciary to take
measures against José Ricardo de Prada, a
National High Court judge. He had
participated in a round table organized by the
City Council of Tolosa, Guipúzcoa, where he
expressed agreement with the concerns of
international human rights organizations
regarding the barriers to effective
investigations of cases of torture in Spain. In
addition, the Prosecutor’s Office supported a
request by the Association of Victims of
Terrorism that he should be removed as
member of a court in two criminal trials
because of his alleged bias. In June, the
National High Court dismissed both requests
to take action against the judge.
During the year, the National High Court
delivered 22 guilty verdicts against 25 people
for glorifying terrorism offences. Most rulings
came as a result of “Operation Spider”,
involving the interception of messages
published on social media. Between April
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
2014 and April 2016, 69 individuals were
arrested as part of the operation.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
New cases of torture and other ill-treatment,
including excessive use of force by law
enforcement officers, were reported
throughout the year. Investigations into
allegations of torture and other ill-treatment
were sometimes not effectively and
thoroughly conducted.
In January, the judge investigating the
death in Cadiz on 4 April 2015 of Juan
Antonio Martínez González, as a result of the
injuries sustained while he was being
restrained by law enforcement officers, made
his ruling. He found that there was no
evidence to support charges that the officers
used banned methods of restraint or that
they exceeded their powers in their
intervention. At the end of the year, an appeal
against the ruling before the Provincial Court
of Cádiz was upheld.
In May, in the case of Beortegui Martinez v
Spain the European Court of Human Rights
once again found that Spain violated the
prohibition of torture and other ill-treatment
by failing to conduct an effective and
thorough investigation into allegations of
torture of individuals under incommunicado
detention. This was the seventh ruling of this
kind against Spain.
In May, the Audiencia Provincial of
Barcelona heard the trial against two officers
regarding the case of Ester Quintana, who
lost an eye in November 2012 as a result of
being hit by a rubber bullet shot by the
Mossos d’Esquadra during a protest in
Barcelona. The trial ended with the acquittal
of both officers, as the court was unable to
establish which officer had fired the bullet.
In July, the Supreme Court partially
annulled the conviction by the High Court of
Saioa Sánchez for an act of terrorism in
December 2015.
The High Court had convicted Saioa
Sánchez and two others of terrorism-related
offences. Her appeal to the Supreme Court
claimed that the High Court refused to
investigate whether the statement of one of
337the defendants, Iñigo Zapirain, implicating
her in the offence, had been made under
duress. The Supreme Court ordered a new
hearing, asking that the Manual on the
Effective Investigation and Documentation of
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(Istanbul Protocol) be followed to assess the
veracity of the statement of Iñigo Zapirain.
The ruling took account of the concerns
expressed by international human rights
bodies about impunity and lack of thorough
and effective investigations, as well as about
shortcomings in the quality and accuracy of
forensic investigations.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The number of irregular arrivals of refugees
and migrants, crossing from Morocco into the
Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla
through the fence separating the two
countries, decreased on the previous year.
However, the overall number of arrivals
including those passing through regular
border crossings increased. There continued
to be collective expulsions by Spanish law
enforcement officers in Ceuta and Melilla
towards Morocco. The Spanish reception
system for asylum-seekers remained
inadequate, with too few places in official
reception centres and too little assistance for
those housed outside them. Spain failed to
implement European Directives on stateless
persons, asylum procedures and reception
conditions. There continued to be no
implementation of the Asylum Act, six years
after its entry into force. As a result, asylum-
seekers across the country experienced
uneven access to the assistance they are
entitled to. Between January and October,
12,525 asylum applications were submitted
in Spain, according to Eurostat data,
compared with 4,513 in 2013. By August,
the growing backlog of unprocessed asylum
applications had reached 29,845 cases.
On 9 September, at least 60 people from
sub-Saharan Africa who had gained access
to Spanish territory by climbing the fences
separating Ceuta from Morocco were
collectively expelled. Before being expelled
338
some of them were beaten by Moroccan
officers who entered the area between the
fences, which is Spanish territory. Some of
those returned to Morocco were injured while
scaling the fences and as a result of the
beatings.
Although Spain agreed to receive 1,449
people from the Middle East and North Africa
under resettlement schemes, only 289
people, all Syrian nationals, had reached
Spanish territory by December. Likewise, in
contrast to the commitment made to receive
15,888 people in need of international
protection from Italy and Greece under the
EU internal relocation programme, only 609
were relocated to Spain by December.
IMPUNITY
Spanish authorities continued to refuse to co-
operate with the Argentine judiciary to
investigate crimes under international law
committed during the Civil War and by the
Franco regime. Spanish authorities
obstructed Argentine prosecuting authorities
in the class action known as “Querella
Argentina” from taking statements from some
of the victims and the 19 defendants. By
means of a circular dated 30 September, the
Spanish Prosecutor’s Office instructed
territorial prosecutor offices to refuse to
conduct any of the judicial inquiries
requested by the Argentine prosecuting
authorities, arguing that it would not be
possible to investigate the crimes reported,
such as enforced disappearances and
torture, under the Amnesty Act (among other
acts) and because of the statute of
limitations.
DISCRIMINATION – MIGRANTS’ HEALTH
Austerity measures continued to have a
detrimental effect on human rights, especially
with regard to access to health and social
protection for some of the most vulnerable
groups. The Constitutional Court declared
that legislation approved in 2012, restricting
access to free health care for undocumented
migrants including primary health care, was
constitutional. This reform has taken away
the health care cards from 748,835 migrants,
Amnesty International Report 2016/17removing or seriously limiting their access to
the health system and in some situations
putting their lives at risk. There has been a
particular impact on women, in terms of
barriers to information on, and services
related to, sexual and reproductive health.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
Public spending on housing was cut by over
50% between 2008 and 2015, while
mortgage foreclosures continued unabated.
According to statistics from the General
Council of the Judiciary, up to September
2016 there were 19,714 forced mortgage
evictions and 25,688 evictions for non-
payment of rent. However, there were no
official figures showing the number of people
affected by foreclosures in Spain, nor
disaggregated data by sex or age, which
prevented the adoption of measures to
protect the most vulnerable. Householders
facing repossession claims continued to lack
adequate legal remedies to enforce the
protection of their right to housing before
courts.
alleged crimes under international law,
although the process was slow. Many
human rights challenges remained,
including the authorities’ reliance on the
Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) to arrest
and detain suspects; torture and other ill-
treatment in police custody, and impunity
for enforced disappearance and other
violations. Victims of violations during the
armed conflict faced challenges in
rebuilding lives and livelihoods as coherent
relief and reparation plans had yet to be
implemented.
BACKGROUND
Sri Lanka initiated a constitutional reform
process, began to design truth, justice and
reparation mechanisms, and began to
institute legal and procedural reforms to
address, and ensure, non-repetition of the
serious human rights violations and abuses
that plagued the country for decades. It
initiated public consultations on these
mechanisms, but failed to adequately
support implementation of the process.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
According to figures from the Ministry of
Health, Social Services and Equality, 44
women were killed by their partners or ex-
partners as of December. The Act on
Comprehensive Protection Measures Against
Gender-Based Violence and the
establishment of Courts on Violence Against
Women came into force in 2004. However,
there has not been a participatory and
transparent review of the impact of the law
since then, despite concerns about the
effectiveness of prosecutions and the
adequacy of victim protection measures. Tamils suspected of links to the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) continued to be
detained under the PTA, which permits
extended administrative detention and shifts
the burden of proof onto the detainee alleging
torture or other ill-treatment. In 2015 the
government pledged to repeal the PTA and
replace it with legislation that complied with
international standards, but had not
implemented this commitment by the end of
2016. A draft policy and legal framework for
replacement legislation submitted for cabinet
approval in October retained many of the
PTA’s most problematic elements although it
did introduce safeguards against torture.
In June, President Sirisena instructed the
police and armed forces to abide by Human
Rights Commission of Sri Lanka directives,
that were designed to protect those arrested
under the PTA and other emergency
measures and to end practices that can lead
to abuse. Such abuses include the failure of
arresting officials to identify themselves, the
SRI LANKA
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Head of state and government: Maithripala Sirisena
Sri Lanka continued to pursue
commitments to deliver accountability for
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
339transport of suspects in unmarked vehicles,
and the use of unofficial places of detention.
The directives also guaranteed detainees’
access to a lawyer, including during
interrogation, but these were not fully
respected.
In late August, human rights lawyer
Lakshan Dias petitioned the Supreme Court
accusing the Terrorist Investigation Division of
the police of violating the directives by
refusing to allow him to meet with his client.
An amendment to the Code of Criminal
Procedure that would have deprived those
arrested of access to legal counsel until the
police recorded their statements was
withdrawn in October after lawyers protested.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The UN Special Rapporteur on torture visited
Sri Lanka in May. He found that severe forms
of torture by police continued, although
probably at lower levels than during the
armed conflict, and that impunity persisted
for both old and new cases. He noted that
procedural norms such as prolonged
arbitrary detention without trial under the PTA
“almost invite torture and ill-treatment as a
routine method of work.” In August, Sri
Lanka made a declaration under the UN
Convention against Torture recognizing the
competence of the UN Committee against
Torture to receive and consider
communications from individuals alleging
violations of their rights under the
Convention.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Reports continued of excessive use of force
in the context of policing. Impunity continued
to persist for past incidents. The killings by
the army of unarmed demonstrators
demanding clean water in August 2013 had
yet to be prosecuted. In October a magistrate
ruled that the killings were crimes, and
ordered further hearings in 2017 to
determine whether there was sufficient
evidence to refer the case for prosecution.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In May, Sri Lanka ratified the International
Convention against Enforced Disappearance,
but by the end of the year had not passed
legislation criminalizing enforced
disappearance in domestic law. The
Presidential Commission to Investigate into
Complaints Regarding Missing Persons
concluded in July, having received over
19,000 civilian complaints. However, little
progress was made in clarifying the fate of
the missing or bringing perpetrators of
enforced disappearance to justice. In August,
Parliament bypassed public consultation
when it adopted an Act establishing the
Office on Missing Persons to assist families to
trace missing relatives and take on the
case load left by the Commission.
IMPUNITY
Impunity persisted for alleged crimes under
international law committed during the armed
conflict. Impunity also remained for many
other human rights violations. These included
the January 2006 extrajudicial executions of
five students in Trincomalee by security
personnel and the killing of 17 aid workers
with the NGO Action Against Hunger in
Muttur in August 2006.
In May, the former Media Minister,
testifying in a habeas corpus case into the
December 2011 disappearances of political
activists Lalith Weeraraj and Kugan
Muruganandan, stated that his claim at the
time that the two activists were in government
custody and that their whereabouts could not
be revealed was based on information from
the Defence Ministry. The investigation into
the involvement of army intelligence officers
in the 2010 disappearance of dissident
cartoonist Prageeth Eknaligoda was ongoing.
In August a court in the capital, Colombo,
ordered a new autopsy of the remains of
newspaper editor Lasantha Wickrematunge,
who was murdered in 2009.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In August, Balendran Jeyakumari, an activist
against enforced disappearances, who had
340
Amnesty International Report 2016/17previously been detained without charge for a
year under the PTA, was once again
summoned for questioning. Human rights
defender Ruki Fernando remained barred by
court order from speaking about an ongoing
police investigation into his advocacy on her
case; his confiscated electronic equipment
was not returned.
Sandhya Eknaligoda, the wife of
disappeared dissident cartoonist Prageeth
Eknaligoda, faced repeated threats and acts
of intimidation. These included protests
outside the court where her husband’s
habeas corpus case was being heard, and a
poster campaign that accused her of
supporting the LTTE after the police identified
seven army intelligence officers suspected of
involvement in his disappearance.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
In June, journalist Freddy Gamage was
beaten by men he identified as supporters of
a politician in the town of Negombo. Freddy
Gamage had been threatened previously over
articles he wrote exposing the politician’s
alleged corruption and links to organized
crime. He was further threatened by one of
his attackers when they met in court after he
pointed him out in an identification parade.
Impunity persisted for past attacks on media
workers; according to media NGOs, attacks
included some 44 killings since 2004.
People engaged in activism in the north
and east continued to report harassment and
surveillance by security forces.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
Sri Lanka initiated a Constitutional reform
process aimed at ensuring checks on
executive power and more equitable ethnic
power sharing. The results of public
consultations on the content of a new
Constitution were published in May.
Parliament was expected to debate a
proposed draft Constitution in early 2017.
In July, Sri Lanka passed the Right to
Information Act. In August, the cabinet
approved a National Policy on Durable
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Solutions for Conflict-Affected Displacement.
This aimed to protect human rights by
guiding the return of private lands seized by
the military, creation of livelihood and income
generating opportunities for the displaced,
and assistance for returning refugees. The
policy emphasized non-discrimination,
access to justice and reparations.
Implementation was expected to begin in
February 2017.
DISCRIMINATION
Tamils continued to complain of ethnic
profiling, surveillance and harassment by
police who suspected them of LTTE links. In
August, the UN Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination found that the PTA
was disproportionately used against Tamils
and was discriminatory in effect.
Christians and Muslims reported incidents
of harassment, threats and physical violence
by members of the public and supporters of
hardline Sinhala Buddhist political groups.
Police failed to take action against attackers
or in some cases blamed religious minorities
for inciting opponents. In June, a group
calling itself Sinha Le (Lion’s Blood) was
linked to protests against a mosque
construction in the city of Kandy. In June, its
supporters waged a social media campaign
of threats and intimidation against Equal
Ground, an organization seeking human and
political rights for the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, intersex and questioning
(LGBTIQ) community of Sri Lanka.
In June, the Health Ministry noted that
“transgender people are often socially,
economically, politically and legally
marginalized... and vulnerable to harassment
violence and sexual assault and
discrimination in access to public spaces.” It
ordered health services for transgender
individuals, including physician-certified
Gender Recognition Certificates to assist in
the amendment of birth certificates to
accurately reflect the sex with which the
individual identified.
341VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Impunity persisted for violence against
women and girls, including rape by military
personnel and civilians, and also in situations
of domestic violence such as marital rape.
Women human rights defenders supporting
constitutional reforms advocated repeal of
Article 16(1), which upheld laws existing
prior to the current Constitution, even when
they were inconsistent with the Constitution.
This included tenets of Muslim personal law
that permitted child marriage and failed to
recognize marital rape.
DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed;
no executions were carried out. In
September, a former MP was sentenced to
death for the murder of a political rival.
SUDAN
Republic of the Sudan
Head of state and government: Omar Hassan Ahmed
al-Bashir
The authorities refused to execute arrest
warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur, Blue Nile
and South Kordofan states remained dire,
with widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Evidence pointed to the use of chemical
weapons by government forces in Darfur.
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly were
arbitrarily restricted and critics and
suspected opponents of the government
were subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention
and other violations. Excessive use of force
by the authorities in dispersing gatherings
led to numerous casualties.
BACKGROUND
Armed conflicts persisted in Darfur, Blue Nile
and South Kordofan, leading to civilian
342
casualties and widespread disruption and
hardship.
In March, the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP) proposed a
Roadmap Agreement for peace and dialogue
to end the conflicts. The Agreement commits
parties to end conflicts in Darfur, Blue Nile
and South Kordofan and ensure
humanitarian access to all populations in
these areas. It also commits parties to engage
in an inclusive national dialogue process. The
government signed the Agreement in March
but opposition groups refused at first to sign.
On 8 August, the agreement was signed by
four opposition groups: the National Umma
Party; the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N); the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM); and the Sudan
Liberation Movement (SLM-MM) led by Minni
Minnawi. The following day, negotiations
resumed in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, along two
tracks: between the SPLM-N and the
government; and on Darfur around cessation
of hostilities and humanitarian access.
However, on 14 August, the talks collapsed
between the government and the armed
opposition groups, the SPLM-N, JEM and
SLM-MM. The AUHIP announced an
indefinite suspension of the peace talks. Both
sides blamed each other for the collapse of
the talks.
When Sudan’s human rights record was
examined under the UN Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) process in May, Sudan
accepted a number of recommendations
including ratification of the UN Convention
against Torture and efforts to prevent torture
and inhuman treatment. However, Sudan
rejected recommendations to remove
impunity provisions from the National
Security Act 2010 and ensure independent
investigation and prosecution of crimes under
international law and human rights violations
committed by the National Intelligence and
Security Service (NISS), the armed forces
and the police. 1
In January, Parliament passed an
amendment that increased the maximum
penalty for rioting from two to five years’
imprisonment.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT South Kordofan and Blue Nile
The authorities continued to refuse to
execute five arrest warrants issued by the ICC
for Sudanese nationals, including two
warrants for President al-Bashir on charges
of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes allegedly committed in Darfur. On 24 April, the Sudan Revolutionary Front, a
coalition of four armed opposition groups,
announced a unilateral ceasefire of six
months, extending a previous ceasefire
announced in October 2015. On 17 June,
President al-Bashir declared a four-month
unilateral cessation of hostilities in Blue Nile
and South Kordofan. In October, he extended
the cessation of hostilities in these areas to
the end of year.
Despite the declared cessation of
hostilities, government forces and the SPLM-
N engaged in sporadic military attacks in
Sudan People’s Liberation Army-North
(SPLA-N) controlled areas. The armed
conflict was characterized by aerial and
ground attacks by government forces, many
directed at civilian objects – that is, objects
which are not military objectives – as well as
denial of humanitarian access to civilians. 3
ARMED CONFLICT
Darfur
The security and humanitarian situation in
Darfur remained dire, as the armed conflict
entered its thirteenth year in 2016.
In January, government forces launched a
large-scale military campaign in the Jebel
Marra area of Darfur. Co-ordinated ground
and air attacks targeted locations throughout
Jebel Marra until May. After that, the
seasonal rains intensified, making ground
attacks impractical throughout most of the
area; air operations continued, however,
through to mid-September.
A large number of crimes under
international law and human rights violations
committed by Sudanese government forces
were documented, including the bombing of
civilians and civilian property, the unlawful
killing of men, women and children, the
abduction and rape of women, the forced
displacement of civilians and the looting and
destruction of civilian property, including the
destruction of entire villages.
Evidence was also documented that
suggested the Sudanese government forces
repeatedly used chemical weapons during
attacks in Jebel Marra. 2 Satellite imagery,
more than 200 in-depth interviews with
survivors and expert analysis of dozens of
images of injuries indicated that at least 30
probable chemical attacks took place in Jebel
Marra between January and September
2016. An estimated 200 to 250 people may
have died as a result of exposure to chemical
weapons agents, with many – or most – being
children. Most survivors of the suspected
chemical weapons attacks had no access to
adequate medical care.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Civil society activists were subjected to
arbitrary arrests and arbitrary restrictions on
their activities.
On 28 January, the NISS stopped a
seminar organized at Al Mahas Club in the
capital Khartoum by a committee opposed to
the building of the Kajbar and Dal dams in
Northern Sudan state. The committee
claimed the dams would have a damaging
social and environmental impact. The NISS
detained 12 people before releasing them
later that day.
The NISS raided the office of the NGO
TRACKS (Khartoum Centre for Training and
Human Development) on 29 February and
confiscated mobile phones and laptops, as
well as documents, the passports of those
present and two vehicles. They detained the
Director of TRACKS, Khalafalla Mukhtar, for
six hours, along with another TRACKS
employee and Mustafa Adam, a visitor and
Director of Al Zarqaa, another civil society
organization. 4 On 22 May, the NISS arrested
eight TRACKS employees and affiliates. Five
were released on bail in June, but three were
detained without charge for nearly three
343months by the Office of the Prosecutor for
State Security before being transferred to Al
Huda Prison to await trial. 5 In August, a total
of six TRACKS employees and affiliates were
charged with various offences including
crimes against the state that carry the death
penalty. The trial had not concluded by the
end of the year. 6
Between 23 and 28 March, four civil
society representatives were intercepted by
security officials at Khartoum International
Airport while on their way to a high-level
meeting with diplomats in Geneva,
Switzerland, in preparation for Sudan’s
examination under the UPR process. 7
The authorities continued to prevent
opposition political parties from organizing
peaceful public activities. The NISS
prevented the Republican Party from
marking the anniversary of the execution of
its founder, Mahmoud Mohamed Taha, on 18
January. In February, NISS agents prevented
two opposition political parties – the
Sudanese Communist Party and Sudanese
Congress Party – from holding a public event
in Khartoum.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Arbitrary restrictions on freedom of
expression continued. The authorities
regularly confiscated newspaper print runs.
During 2016, 12 newspapers had their issues
confiscated on 44 different occasions.
Dozens of journalists were arrested and
interrogated by the NISS Media Office and
the Press and the Publications Prosecution
Office in Khartoum.
In April, the NISS confiscated the daily
newspapers Akhir Lahzah, Al Sihaa and Al-
Tagheer, without giving reasons. In May,
Alwan, Al-Mustagilla and Al-Jareeda
newspapers were confiscated by the NISS
from the printers. In October, Al Sihaa and
Al-Jareeda newspapers were confiscated.
On 14 August, the National Council for
Press and Publications suspended
indefinitely the publication of four
newspapers: Elaf, Al-Mustagilla, Al Watan
and Awal Al Nahar. The Council said it had
suspended the newspapers because of their
344
continued violation of the regulations in the
Press and Publications Act.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Across Sudan, NISS officials and members of
other security forces targeted opposition
political party members, human rights
defenders, students and political activists for
arbitrary arrest, detention and other
violations.
On 1 February, NISS officials arrested four
students from Darfur in Khartoum after a
protest organized by the United Popular
Front, affiliated with the Sudan Liberation
Movement-Abdul Wahid Al Nour, against the
conflict in Jebel Marra.
In April, violent confrontations between
students and security agents went on for
three weeks at the University of Khartoum.
The protests erupted because of reports that
the government was planning to sell some of
the university’s buildings. Dozens of students
were arrested during these protests,
including five who were detained without
charge in Khartoum. 8 They were released in
late April, but some were rearrested in May.
NISS agents raided the office of a
prominent human rights lawyer, Nabil Adib,
in Khartoum on 5 May and arrested 11
people, including eight students who had
been expelled or suspended from the
University of Khartoum. All were released by
late June.
In Central Darfur state, on 31 July, NISS
agents arrested 10 people who had attended
a meeting with the US Special Envoy for
Sudan and South Sudan during his visit to
the region. Of the 10, seven were internally
displaced persons. They were all released in
September. 9
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The authorities arbitrarily restricted freedom
of assembly and, on many occasions, used
excessive force to disperse gatherings,
resulting in several deaths and numerous
injuries. No investigations were conducted
into the deaths.
In February, NISS officials and students
affiliated to the ruling National Congress Party
Amnesty International Report 2016/17violently disrupted a public seminar
organized by a political opposition party at
the University of El Geneina. A number of
students were seriously injured, and one,
Salah al Din Qamar Ibrahim, died as a result
of his injuries.
On 19 April, Abubakar Hassan Mohamed
Taha, an 18-year-old student at the University
of Kordofan, was shot in the head by NISS
agents in Al Obied, capital of North Kordofan
state. The students had been marching
peacefully when heavily armed NISS agents
intercepted them, reportedly shooting into the
crowd, in an attempt to prevent them from
taking part in student union elections.
Another 27 students were injured, five of
them seriously. The killing of Abubakar
Hassan Mohamed Taha provoked nationwide
student protests. 10
On 27 April, 20-year-old Mohamad Al
Sadiq Yoyo, a second-year student at the
Omdurman Al Ahlia University in Khartoum
state, was shot dead by NISS agents.
On 8 May, police forces in Kosti city in
White Nile state violently dispersed a
peaceful sit-in organized by the Faculty of
Engineering Students’ Association of the
University of Al-Imam Al-Mahdi. The police
reportedly used tear gas and batons, injuring
about seven students, four of them seriously.
1. Sudan: Amnesty International public statement at the 33rd session of
the UN Human Rights Council (AFR 54/4875/2016)
2. Sudan: Scorched earth, poisoned air – Sudanese government forces
ravage Jebel Marra, Darfur (AFR 54/4877/2016)
3. Sudan: Five years and counting – Intensified aerial bombardment,
ground offensive and humanitarian crisis in South Kordofan state
(AFR 54/4913/2016)
4. Sudan: Ten civil society activists harassed by NISS (AFR
54/3634/2016)
5. Sudan: Further information – three human rights defenders still
detained (AFR 54/4267/2016)
6. Sudan: Drop all charges and release activists detained for exercising
their rights (News story, 29 August)
7. Sudan blocks civil society participation in UN-led human rights
review (AFR 54/4310/2016)
8. Sudan: Student activists detained without charge (AFR
54/3861/2016)
9. Sudan: Eight arrested, whereabouts unknown (AFR 54/4617/2016)
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
10. Sudan: Government must investigate brutal killing of 18-year-old
university student by intelligence agents (News story, 20 April)
SWAZILAND
Kingdom of Swaziland
Head of state: King Mswati III
Head of government: Barnabas Sibusiso Dlamini
Legislation continued to be used to repress
dissent. The High Court ruled that security
legislation violated the rights to freedom of
expression, of association and of assembly,
which were protected under the
Constitution. The findings of an inquest into
a death in police custody were not
disclosed. There was insufficient protection
against torture and other ill-treatment.
Legislation gave the police wide-ranging
powers to use lethal force, contrary to
international human rights law and
standards.
BACKGROUND
Two thirds of the population continued to live
below the poverty line. In October, the
Afrobarometer research network reported
that around half the population said they
often went without food and water, and over a
third said that medical care was inadequate.
LEGAL DEVELOPMENTS
In May, the King appointed seven senior
lawyers to act as Supreme Court judges. The
appointments were made in contravention of
Article 153 of the Constitution, which
stipulates that judges be appointed in an
open, transparent and competitive process.
As a result, the Law Society of Swaziland
boycotted the November Supreme Court
session and demanded the appointment of
permanent judges in line with the
Constitution.
In September, the High Court ruled that
sections of the 1938 Sedition and Subversive
Activities Act (SSA) and the 2008
Suppression of Terrorism Act (STA) were
invalid as they infringed on constitutionally
protected rights to freedom of expression,
345association and assembly. The judgment
came after provisions in the laws were
challenged in the applications filed in 2009
by human rights lawyer Thulani Maseko.
Thulani Maseko was charged under the SSA
in 2009. Another application was filed in
2014 by Mario Masuku and Maxwell Dlamini,
leaders of the banned opposition People’s
United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO),
who were charged under both Acts in 2014;
and by Mlungisi Makhanya and seven others,
who were also charged under the Acts in
2014. The government appealed against the
High Court’s decision in September. The
appeal was due to be heard in early 2017. same month. He was awaiting trial at the end
of the year.
FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The Public Order Bill, if passed, would
undermine rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association. Among other
things, it would criminalize the act of
organizing a public gathering without prior
notification to the authorities. The bill, which
was expected to be passed by the Senate,
before being ratified by the King, remained in
draft form at the end of the year.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In June 2016, The Nation Magazine
published an article by Thulani Maseko in
which he questioned the independence of
the judiciary. Following this, he and the
magazine’s editor, Bheki Makhubu, were
served with summonses for defamation by an
acting judge of the Supreme Court who had
been appointed in May.
William Mkhaliphi, an elderly sugar cane
farmer from Vuvulane, in northeastern
Swaziland, was arrested by police in August
after he voiced concerns about alleged royal
investments and land grabbing. He had
raised concerns at the traditional Sibaya
meeting convened by the King in Ludzidzini
Royal Village where the community were
invited to give their views on national issues.
William Mkhaliphi was charged following
spurious allegations of theft and released on
bail by the Magistrates’ Court in Simunye the
346
DEATHS IN CUSTODY
The authorities had still not made public any
findings of an inquest into the death in police
custody of Luciano Reginaldo Zavale, a
Mozambican national, in June 2015.
Independent forensic evidence indicated that
he did not die of natural causes and the
inquest began in August 2015. According to
reports, it reached a conclusion the same
year. Luciano Reginaldo Zavale died on the
day he was arrested on allegations that he
was in possession of a stolen laptop.
The authorities failed to address inadequate
legislative protection against torture and other
ill-treatment. Swaziland took no steps to
enact national legislation to give effect to its
obligations under the UN Convention against
Torture to which it acceded in 2004, nor to
ratify the Optional Protocol to the UN
Convention against Torture.
The Constitution (under Section 15(4))
allowed for the use of lethal force by police in
a range of circumstances, including to
defend property; to make a lawful arrest or to
prevent the escape of a lawfully detained
person; to suppress a riot; or to prevent the
commission of a serious criminal offence.
These grounds remained inconsistent with
international human rights law and
standards.
There was no independent mechanism for
investigating abuses committed by the police.
By the end of the year, no investigations had
been undertaken into an incident in February
when Ayanda Mkhabela, a student at the
University of Swaziland (UNISWA), was run
over by an armoured police vehicle during a
student protest, and left paralysed.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Despite high levels of gender-based violence,
the Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence
Bill, introduced in Parliament in 2009, had
not been enacted. Women and girls
experiencing gender-based violence had few
Amnesty International Report 2016/17remedies available to them under domestic
law. Nor were they sufficiently protected in
law from forced or early marriages.
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
In May, Swaziland’s human rights record was
examined under the UN Universal Periodic
(UPR) review process during which a
number of concerns were raised. They
included the need to address barriers in
access to primary education; the
reintegration of girls into the education
system after giving birth; non-discriminatory
access to health and education services
irrespective of perceived or actual sexual
orientation or gender identity; and the need
for measures to be taken to combat and
eradicate forced labour.
DEATH PENALTY
No death sentences were imposed during the
year. Despite recommendations for a
moratorium on the death penalty during the
UPR, the death penalty was maintained by
Swaziland.
SWEDEN
Kingdom of Sweden
Head of state: King Carl XVI Gustaf
Head of government: Stefan Löfven
New restrictions on residence permits and
family reunification for refugees and others
granted protection came into force. Roma
and Sami peoples faced ongoing
discrimination. A parliamentary committee
published recommendations to reform
inadequate laws on rape.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In June, Parliament passed a temporary law
affecting people entitled to international
protection that would apply for three years
after coming into force in July. The law limits
the length of the residence permits given to
persons granted protection, from permanent
residence permits to temporary permits of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
three years for persons granted refugee
status and of 13 months for persons granted
subsidiary protection. The law also withdrew
the possibility of family reunification for those
granted subsidiary protection.
DISCRIMINATION – ROMA AND
SAMI PEOPLES
Two UN Committees expressed serious
concerns about Sweden’s treatment of Roma
citizens of other European countries. In April,
the UN Human Rights Committee called on
Sweden to ensure that Roma had equal
access to opportunities and services, citing
concerns about their limited access to
education, employment, housing and health
care. In July, the UN ICESCR Committee
raised similar concerns, including the
resulting vulnerability to forced eviction of
many Roma living in informal settlements.
Romani people remained at risk of hate
crimes based on their ethnicity.
In July, the District Court of Stockholm
found that the Skåne police database of
nearly 5,000 Swedish-Roma people
constituted ethnic discrimination and
breached Swedish law. The Court awarded
compensation to the complainants for the
harm suffered; an appeal by the state was
pending at the end of the year.
The UN Human Rights Committee and the
ICESCR Committee, in April and July
respectively, raised continuing concerns
about the ability of Sami people to enjoy the
rights of Indigenous Peoples, notably their
land rights.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In April, the government announced a
scheme to provide financial compensation to
transgender people who had been required
to undergo forced sterilization to legally
change their gender.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In October, the 2014 Sexual Offences
Committee inquiry into sexual offences
presented its proposals to the government.
They included the introduction of a consent-
347based definition of rape, and liability for
negligence for sexual offences. 1
ARMS TRADE
The Inspectorate of Strategic Products (ISP)
− the national authority charged with the
control and compliance of defence material
and dual-use products − cleared the sale by
the Saab Group of the advanced air radar
system GlobalEye to the United Arab
Emirates. Concerns raised by journalists
alleging a lack of due diligence prior to the
2010 sale of the Saab 2000 airborne early
warning and Erieye control system to Saudi
Arabia, were left unanswered as the ISP’s
records remained classified. Concerns
remained regarding the possible use of these
technologies by the Saudi Arabia-led coalition
in the conflict in Yemen to commit or
facilitate serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law.
1. Sweden: Submission to the UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (EUR 42/3305/2016)
SWITZERLAND
Swiss Confederation
Head of state and government: Johann Schneider-
Ammann (replaced Simonetta Sommaruga in January)
A new law on asylum introduced free legal
counselling for asylum-seekers. However,
concerns remained regarding the respect of
the rights of refugees and migrants.
Authorities pushed back thousands of
asylum-seekers to Italy. In September, the
new surveillance law was accepted in
a referendum.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, a new law on asylum, which had
been adopted in September 2015, was
accepted by referendum and partly entered
into force. The law introduced some positive
measures, including free legal counselling for
asylum-seekers as of 2019, and the legal
348
duty to take into account the needs of
vulnerable asylum-seekers.
In the second half of the year, civil society
organizations reported that authorities had
pushed back to Italy several thousand
asylum-seekers, including several hundred
unaccompanied minors; some of them had
close family members living in Switzerland.
In July, the Federal Administrative Court
concluded that the State Secretariat for
Migration had not effectively investigated the
case of an asylum-seeking Nigerian woman
who was allegedly trafficked into Switzerland.
Asylum-seeking children in reception
centres continued to be denied access to
education. On 1 October, a new law imposing
a duty on cantonal authorities to ensure their
right to education entered into force.
Concerns remained regarding the restrictions
imposed on the right of freedom of
movement of asylum-seekers in most federal
reception centres.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
In July, the National Commission for the
Prevention of Torture raised concerns about
police using disproportionate force in some
cantons during operations to deport migrants.
Concerns remained regarding the
attempted deportations of asylum-seekers
with severe mental illnesses. In June,
authorities in Neuchâtel unsuccessfully tried
to deport a Kurdish asylum-seeker to
Bulgaria despite his earlier attempt to commit
suicide. In September, two Syrian women
asylum-seekers, who had been admitted to a
psychiatric hospital in Schaffhausen,
attempted suicide shortly after police had
removed them from the hospital to deport
them. The Zurich Public Prosecutor Office
opened an investigation into the events
shortly after.
DISCRIMINATION
In May, the Lower Chamber of
the Federal Parliament (National Council)
voted in favour of a bill allowing second-
parent adoption for same-sex couples.
In July, the prohibition of full-face veils
entered into force in the Ticino canton. In
Amnesty International Report 2016/17September, the Lower Chamber of the
Federal Parliament (National Council)
adopted a bill to ban full-face veils at the
national level. The bill was pending before
the Upper Chamber (Council of States) at the
end of the year.
In November, the Zurich District Court
rejected the appeal introduced by Mohamed
Wa Baile, a Swiss citizen of Kenyan origin,
who in February 2015 alleged that the police
identity check that he was subjected to at the
Zurich train station was based on racial
discrimination.
On 2 December, the government
submitted to Parliament the bill authorizing
the ratification of the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention).
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
In May, the Secretary of State for Migration
launched a procedure to strip a 19-year-old
bi-national of his Swiss nationality for having
allegedly joined the armed group Islamic
State without him being charged with any
criminal offence.
In September, the surveillance law, which
had been adopted in September 2015, was
accepted in a referendum. The law grants
far-reaching powers to the Federal
Intelligence Service to access personal
information from a variety of sources and for
vaguely defined aims, including
counteracting terrorist threats.
SYRIA
Syrian Arab Republic
Head of state: Bashar al-Assad
Head of government: Imad Khamis (replaced Wael
Nader al-Halqi in June)
Parties to the armed conflicts in Syria
committed war crimes, other serious
violations of international humanitarian law
and gross human rights abuses with
impunity. Government and allied Russian
forces carried out indiscriminate attacks
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
and direct attacks on civilians and civilian
objects using aerial bombing and artillery,
causing thousands of civilian casualties.
There were reports that government forces
also used chemical agents. Government
forces maintained lengthy sieges that
trapped civilians and cut their access to
essential goods and services. The
authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained
thousands, subjecting many to enforced
disappearance, prolonged detention and
unfair trials, and continued to
systematically torture and otherwise ill-treat
detainees causing deaths in detention. They
also committed unlawful killings, including
extrajudicial executions. The armed group
Islamic State (IS) besieged civilians, carried
out direct attacks on civilians and
indiscriminate attacks, sometimes
reportedly using chemical agents,
perpetrated numerous unlawful killings, and
subjected thousands of women and girls to
sexual slavery and other abuses. Other non-
state armed groups indiscriminately shelled
and besieged predominantly civilian areas.
US-led forces carried out air strikes on IS
and other targets, in which hundreds of
civilians were killed. By the end of the year,
the conflict had caused the deaths of more
than 300,000 people, displaced 6.6
million people within Syria and forced 4.8
million people to seek refuge abroad.
BACKGROUND
The armed conflicts in Syria continued
throughout the year with ongoing
international participation. Syrian government
and allied forces, including Lebanese
Hizbullah and other non-Syrian armed
groups and militias, controlled much of
western Syria and made advances in other
contested areas. They were supported by
Russian armed forces, which carried out
large-scale aerial attacks across Syria, killing
and injuring thousands of civilians according
to human rights organizations. Some Russian
air strikes appeared to be indiscriminate or to
amount to direct attacks on civilians and
civilian objects, which would constitute war
crimes.
349Non-state armed groups primarily fighting
government forces controlled northwestern
and other areas, while forces of the
Autonomous Administration controlled most
of the predominantly Kurdish northern border
regions. IS held parts of eastern and central
Syria but lost ground during the year.
The UN Security Council remained divided
on Syria and unable to secure a path to
peace. Efforts made by the UN Special Envoy
for Syria to promote peace talks were largely
unsuccessful. In February, a Security Council
resolution endorsed a cessation of hostilities
agreed by Russia and the USA, but it was
short-lived. In October, Russia vetoed a draft
Security Council resolution calling for an end
to aerial attacks on Aleppo city and for
unimpeded humanitarian access. After
government forces gained control of Aleppo
in December, however, Russian President
Vladimir Putin announced that a ceasefire
backed by both Russia and Turkey had been
agreed between the government and some
opposition forces, to be followed by new
peace negotiations that would commence in
January 2017. On 31 December, the UN
Security Council unanimously adopted a
resolution welcoming the new peace effort
while also calling for the “rapid, safe and
unhindered” delivery of humanitarian aid
across Syria.
The Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic, established by the UN Human
Rights Council in 2011, monitored and
reported on violations of international law
committed in Syria although the Syrian
government continued to deny it entry to
the country.
In December, the UN General Assembly
agreed to establish an independent
international mechanism to ensure
accountability for war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Syria since
March 2011.
ARMED CONFLICT – VIOLATIONS BY
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES AND
ALLIES, INCLUDING RUSSIA
Indiscriminate attacks and direct attacks on
civilians
Government and allied forces continued to
commit war crimes and other serious
violations of international law, including direct
attacks on civilians and indiscriminate
attacks. Government forces repeatedly
attacked areas controlled or contested by
armed opposition groups, killing and injuring
civilians and damaging civilian objects in
unlawful attacks. They regularly bombarded
civilian areas using explosive weapons with
wide-area effects, including artillery shelling
and unguided, high-explosive barrel bombs
dropped from helicopters. The attacks
caused numerous civilian deaths and
injuries, including of children.
Government and allied Russian aircraft
carried out several apparently deliberate
attacks on hospitals, medical centres and
clinics and aid convoys, killing and injuring
civilians, including medical workers.
As the year progressed, government forces
with Russian support increased attacks on
eastern Aleppo, hitting residential homes,
medical facilities, schools, markets and
mosques, killing hundreds of civilians.
Russian-made cluster munitions were also
scattered across the area, with unexploded
munitions posing an ongoing risk to civilians.
Two barrel bombs allegedly containing
chlorine gas were dropped by suspected
government aircraft on 1 August on two
residential neighbourhoods controlled by
non-state armed groups in Saraqeb city, Idleb
province, reportedly injuring at least
28 civilians.
On 26 October, suspected government or
Russian aircraft bombed a school compound
in Haas, Idleb governorate, killing at least 35
civilians including 22 children and
six teachers.
Sieges and denial of humanitarian access
Government forces maintained prolonged
sieges of predominantly civilian areas
350
Amnesty International Report 2016/17controlled or contested by armed groups,
including in Eastern Ghouta, Mouadhamiyah
al-Sham, Madaya, Daraya and, from
September, eastern Aleppo. The government
sieges exposed civilian residents to starvation
and deprived them of access to medical care
and other basic services, while subjecting
them to repeated air strikes, artillery shelling
and other attacks.
The sieges prevented civilians leaving the
area to seek medical care. For example, on
19 March a three-year-old boy reportedly
died in al-Waer, in Homs city, after
government forces prevented him from
leaving the area to receive medical care for a
head injury.
On 12 May, government forces prevented
a UN humanitarian aid delivery, due to be the
first since 2012, from entering Daraya.
Government forces fired mortars into a
residential area of the town, killing two
civilians. In June, government forces allowed
two limited convoys to enter Daraya but
simultaneously intensified their indiscriminate
attacks using barrel bombs, a napalm-like
incendiary substance and other munitions,
forcing the town’s remaining inhabitants to
submit to being evacuated in late August.
From July, government forces trapped
some 275,000 people in eastern Aleppo,
subjecting them to intensified air strikes,
including bombing by Russian forces.
Suspected government and Russian aircraft
bombed a UN/Syrian Arab Red Crescent aid
convoy destined for eastern Aleppo on 19
September at Urum al-Kubra, killing at least
18 civilians including aid workers, and
destroying aid lorries.
Attacks on medical facilities and workers
Government forces continued to target health
facilities and medical workers in areas
controlled by armed opposition groups. They
repeatedly bombed hospitals and other
medical facilities, barred or restricted the
inclusion of medical supplies in humanitarian
aid deliveries to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas, and disrupted or prevented health
care provision in these areas by detaining
medical workers and volunteers. In June, the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
NGO Physicians for Human Rights accused
government forces and their allies of
responsibility for more than 90% of
400 attacks against medical facilities and
768 deaths of medical personnel since
March 2011.
The UN reported that 44 health facilities
were attacked in July alone. Four hospitals
and a blood bank in eastern Aleppo city were
struck in aerial attacks on 23 and 24
July. One, a children’s hospital, was hit twice
in less than 12 hours.
ARMED CONFLICT – ABUSES BY
ARMED GROUPS
Non-state armed groups committed war
crimes, other violations of international
humanitarian law and serious human
rights abuses.
Indiscriminate attacks and direct attacks on
civilians
IS forces carried out direct attacks on
civilians as well as indiscriminate attacks in
which there were civilian casualties. IS
claimed responsibility for a series of suicide
and other bomb attacks in the Sayida Zaynab
district of southern Damascus, including one
on 21 February in which 83 civilians
were killed.
IS forces also carried out suspected
chemical weapons attacks, including in
August and September in northern Syria.
Munitions fired by IS at Um Hawsh, near
Marea, Aleppo governorate, on 16 September
caused blistering and other symptoms
common with exposure to mustard agent.
Some of those affected were civilians.
The Fatah Halab (Aleppo Conquest)
coalition of opposition armed groups
repeatedly carried out indiscriminate artillery,
rocket and mortar attacks on the Sheikh
Maqsoud district of Aleppo city, controlled by
Kurdish People’s Protection Units known as
the YPG, killing at least 83 civilians and
injuring more than 700 civilians between
February and April. In May, at least four
civilians in the area required medical
treatment for symptoms that suggested they
had been exposed to a chlorine attack.
351Armed opposition groups fired imprecise
mortars and missiles into government-held
western Aleppo, killing at least 14 civilians on
3 November, according to the independent
monitoring group Syrian Network for
Human Rights.
Unlawful killings
IS forces committed war crimes by summarily
killing civilians as well as members of rival
armed groups and government forces whom
they held prisoner. In areas of al-Raqqa, Deyr
al-Zur and eastern Aleppo that it controlled,
IS carried out frequent public execution-style
killings, including of people they accused of
spying, smuggling, adultery and blasphemy.
On 28 July, IS members were reported to
have summarily killed at least 25 civilian
women, men and children, at Buwayr village
near Manbij.
On 19 July, a video published on the
internet showed members of the Nour al-
Dine al-Zinki Movement ill-treating and then
beheading a young male.
Sieges and denial of humanitarian assistance
IS forces besieged and at times
indiscriminately shelled government-held
neighbourhoods of Deyr al-Zur city. UN
agencies and Russian forces repeatedly air-
dropped aid into the besieged areas;
however, local human rights activists reported
that government forces within the besieged
areas seized much of the aid intended for
civilians.
Abductions
Both IS and other non-state armed groups
abducted civilians and held them hostage.
In January, Jabhat al-Nusra abducted at
least 11 civilians from their homes in the city
of Idleb. Their fate and whereabouts
remained undisclosed at the end of the year.
The fate and whereabouts of human rights
defender Razan Zaitouneh, her husband
Wa’el Hamada, and Nazem Hamadi and
Samira Khalil also remained undisclosed
following their abduction on 9 December
2013 by unidentified armed men in Duma,
352
an area controlled by Jaysh al-Islam and
other armed groups.
There was no news of the fate or
whereabouts of human rights defender
Abdullah al-Khalil since his abduction by
suspected IS members in al-Raqqa city on
the night of 18 May 2013.
ARMED CONFLICT – AIR STRIKES
BY US-LED FORCES
The US-led international coalition continued
its campaign of air strikes begun in
September 2014, predominantly against IS
but also certain other armed groups in
northern and eastern Syria, including Jabhat
Fatah al-Sham (previously known as Jabhat
al-Nusra). The air strikes, some of which
appeared to be indiscriminate and others
disproportionate, killed and injured hundreds
of civilians. They included suspected
coalition air strikes near Manbij that killed at
least 73 civilians at al-Tukhar on 19 July, and
up to 28 civilians at al-Ghandoura on 28 July.
On 1 December, the US-led coalition was
reported to have admitted causing the deaths
of 24 civilians near Manbij in July while
asserting that its attack had “complied with
the law of armed conflict”.
ARMED CONFLICT – ATTACKS
BY TURKISH FORCES
Turkish forces also carried out air and ground
attacks in northern Syria targeting IS and
Kurdish armed groups. A Turkish air strike
reportedly killed 24 civilians near Suraysat, a
village south of Jarablus, on 28 August.
ARMED CONFLICT – ABUSES
BY THE PYD-LED AUTONOMOUS
ADMINISTRATION
Forces of the Autonomous Administration,
which was led by the Democratic Union Party
(PYD), controlled most of the predominantly
Kurdish northern border regions. In February,
YPG forces demolished the houses of dozens
of Arab civilians in Tal Tamer, al-Hassakeh
governorate, accusing the owners of being IS
supporters, according to the UN Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
High Commissioner also reported the forced
Amnesty International Report 2016/17recruitment of 12 children by the Asayish,
Kurdish security forces and the YPG.
According to the Syrian Network for
Human Rights, YPG shelling and sniper
attacks killed at least 23 civilians in
opposition-held areas of Aleppo city between
February and April.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Millions of people continued to be displaced
by the conflicts. Some 4.8 million people fled
Syria between 2011 and the end of 2016,
including 200,000 who became refugees
during 2016, according to UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency. In the same six-year period,
around 6.6 million others were internally
displaced within Syria, half of them children,
according to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The
authorities in the neighbouring states of
Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan, which hosted
nearly all of the refugees (including
Palestinians displaced from Syria), restricted
the entry of new refugees, exposing them to
further attacks and deprivation in Syria. More
than 75,000 refugees from Syria crossed by
sea or land to Europe; many European and
other states failed to accept a fair share of
refugees from Syria through resettlement or
other safe and legal routes.
the men. Thousands of people, mostly
Islamists, remained disappeared since they
were detained by Syrian government forces in
the late 1970s and early 1980s.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees by
government security and intelligence
agencies and in state prisons remained
systematic and widespread. Torture and other
ill-treatment continued to result in a high
incidence of detainee deaths, adding to the
thousands of deaths in custody since 2011. 1
In August the Human Rights Data Analysis
Group, an NGO that uses scientific
approaches to analyze human rights
violations, estimated that there were at least
17,723 deaths in government custody
between March 2011 and December 2015,
resulting from torture and other ill-treatment.
UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities prosecuted some perceived
opponents before the Anti-Terrorism Court
and the Military Field Court, both of whose
proceedings were flagrantly unfair. Judges
failed to order investigations into allegations
by defendants that they had been tortured or
otherwise ill-treated or coerced into making
“confessions” that were used as evidence
against them at trial.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Government forces held thousands of
detainees without trial, often in conditions
that amounted to enforced disappearance,
adding to the tens of thousands whose fate
and whereabouts remained undisclosed
following their enforced disappearance by
government forces since 2011. They
included peaceful critics and opponents of
the government as well as family members
detained in place of relatives whom the
authorities sought.
Those who remained forcibly disappeared
included human rights lawyer Khalil Ma’touq
and his friend Mohamed Thatha, missing
since October 2012. Released detainees said
they had seen Khalil Ma’touq in government
detention but the authorities denied holding Government and allied forces committed
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial
executions. On 13 December, the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights said that
government and allied forces had entered
civilian homes and committed summary
killings as they advanced through east
Aleppo and that, according to “multiple
sources”, they had killed at least 82 civilians,
including 13 children, on 12 December.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
On 15 June the independent Commission of
Inquiry determined that thousands of Yazidi
women and girls were forcibly transferred by
IS forces into Syria from Sinjar, Iraq, sold in
markets and held in slavery, including sexual
353slavery. Many women and girls were
subjected to sexual violence, rape and other
torture. Women and girls caught trying to
escape were gang-raped or otherwise
tortured or harshly punished; one woman
said that the fighter who had bought her
killed several of her children and repeatedly
raped her after she had tried to flee.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for
many offences. The authorities disclosed little
information about death sentences and no
information on executions.
1. “It breaks the human”: Torture, disease and death in Syria’s prisons
(MDE 24/4508/2016)
TAIWAN
Taiwan
Head of state: Tsai Ing-wen (replaced Ma Ying-jeou
in May)
Head of government: Lin Chuan (replaced Mao Chi-kuo
in May)
Elections in January resulted in Tsai Ing-
wen of the Democratic Progressive Party
(DPP) becoming the country’s first woman
President. There were some positive
developments in three longstanding death
penalty cases but several violent incidents
sparked public calls for retaining the
punishment. The new government decided
to drop charges against more than 100
protesters from the 2014 “Sunflower
Movement”. The same-sex couple
relationship register was extended to 10
municipalities and counties. The Legislative
Yuan’s judicial committee passed
amendments to the Civil Code proposed by
two DPP legislators, a step towards
legalizing same-sex marriage.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 23 May, Prime Minister Lin Chuan
announced that the new cabinet was
dropping criminal charges against 126
protesters. He stated that the previous
354
government’s decision to charge the
protesters was a “political reaction” to the
demonstration instead of merely a “legal
case”. In March 2014, student-led protests
against the Cross-Strait Services Trade
Agreement between Taiwan and China,
referred to as the “Sunflower Movement”,
had led to 24 days of demonstrations, the
occupation of the Legislative Yuan (Taiwan’s
parliament), and a 10-hour occupation of the
Executive Yuan, the government offices.
DEATH PENALTY
Two weeks before the previous government
ended its term in May, the Taichung Branch
of the Taiwan High Court released Cheng
Hsing-tse on bail pending a retrial. He had
served 14 years in prison after he was
convicted of the murder of a police officer
during an exchange of gunfire at a karaoke
parlour in Taichung in 2002. The Prosecutor-
General’s office applied for a retrial in March,
citing new evidence which raised doubts
about his conviction. This was the first retrial
sought in a case where the final Supreme
Court’s ruling upheld the death sentence.
In July 2016, the Prosecutor-General
applied for an extraordinary appeal for Chiou
Ho-shun. He had been imprisoned since
1989, the longest-serving death row inmate
in modern Taiwan history. The application
cited the failure of previous courts to omit
evidence from a coerced “confession”. Chiou
Ho-shun was tortured in custody and forced
to “confess” before being found guilty of
robbery, kidnapping and murder.
On 13 October, the Supreme Court upheld
the High Court’s decision to acquit Hsu Tzi-
chiang, who had repeatedly appealed against
his convictions for kidnapping, extortion and
murder in 1995.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The Legislative Yuan’s Internal Administration
Committee passed a second reading of a
refugee bill on 14 July. It would be the first
such law in Taiwan if passed, and may allow
asylum-seekers from mainland China to
apply for political asylum in Taiwan.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17TAJIKISTAN
Republic of Tajikistan
Head of state: Emomali Rahmon
Head of government: Qokhir Rasulzoda
The space for peaceful dissent continued to
shrink drastically. The authorities invoked
national security concerns and the fight
against terrorism to justify increasingly
harsh restrictions on freedoms of expression
and association. Members of the banned
opposition Islamic Renaissance Party of
Tajikistan (IRPT) were sentenced to life and
long-term imprisonment on terrorism
charges in blatantly unfair secret trials.
Allegations that they were tortured to obtain
confessions were not effectively and
impartially investigated. Lawyers
representing IRPT members faced
harassment, arbitrary detention, prosecution
and long prison terms on politically
motivated charges.
BACKGROUND
In May a national referendum approved wide-
ranging amendments to the Constitution.
These included removing the limit on
presidential terms in office, effectively
enabling President Rahmon to retain the
presidency beyond the next elections, and
banning religion- and nationality-based
political parties. In November “insulting the
leader of the nation” was made a criminal
offence.
At least 170 individuals were prosecuted,
convicted and sentenced to prison for their
alleged involvement in the armed clashes
between government forces and armed
groups in the capital, Dushanbe, in
September 2015, which the authorities
described as an attempt to seize power by a
former deputy defence minister, Abdukhalim
Nazarzoda. Due to the authorities’ near-total
control of news reporting there was little
independent public scrutiny of the official
account which, in turn, cast doubt on the
prosecutions.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Exiled members of the banned opposition
party, Islamic Renaissance Party of Tajikistan
(IRPT) and opposition “Group 24” activists
attended and picketed the annual Human
Dimension Implementation Meeting of the
OSCE in Warsaw, Poland, in September.
Some reported that police and security
services threatened, arbitrarily detained,
questioned and in some cases physically
assaulted their family members in Tajikistan
in retaliation for their peaceful protest in
Warsaw. The government delegation left the
event early in protest against a “terrorist
organisation banned in Tajikistan” being
admitted among other civil society
participants.
UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities continued to emphatically
reject allegations of the politically motivated
criminal prosecution, unfair trial and torture
and other ill-treatment of 14 IRPT leaders for
their alleged role in the September 2015
clashes. The trial at the Supreme Court
began in February and was conducted in
secrecy, inside the pre-trial detention centre
of the State Committee for National Security.
In June, all the defendants were convicted.
Two deputy IRPT leaders, Umarali Khisainov
(also known as Saidumur Khusaini) and
Makhmadali Khaitov (Mukhammadalii Hait),
were given life sentences. Zarafo Khujaeva
(Rakhmoni) was sentenced to two years in
prison; she was released on 5 September
under a presidential pardon. Other sentences
ranged from 14 to 28 years.
The sparse initial official information
relating to the prosecution of the IRPT
leaders, including the charges they faced,
had already been removed from official
sources (including the Prosecutor General’s
Office website and the official news agency
Khovar) in 2015, and any further information
suppressed. The defence lawyers were
compelled to sign non-disclosure agreements
regarding all details of the case and the legal
proceedings. The verdict and official records
of the court proceedings were not officially
released. In August, a leaked copy of the
verdict was published online. The Prosecutor
355General’s Office refused to comment on its
authenticity but its suspected source was
nevertheless prosecuted (see below).
In March the UN Special Rapporteur on
freedom of expression expressed concern
that “the drastic measures taken against
IRPT represent a serious setback for an open
political environment. The government
accuses the IRPT and its members of serious
crimes but it has refused to give public
access to the trial and evidence”. 1
Persecution of defence lawyers
Lawyers who worked on the case of the 14
IRPT leaders faced harassment, intimidation
and, in some cases, arbitrary detention and
prosecution. In October, the Dushanbe City
Court sentenced Buzurgmekhr Yorov and
Nuriddin Makhkamov, two lawyers
representing several co-defendants in the
IRPT case, to 23 and 21 years in prison
respectively following an unfair trial. Apart
from the first court hearing in May, all
sessions were closed to the media and the
public. Both lawyers were found guilty of
“arousing national, racial, local or religious
hostility”, fraud, “public calls for violent
change of the constitutional order of the
Republic of Tajikistan”, and “public calls for
undertaking extremist activities”.
Buzurgmekhr Yorov was also found guilty of
forgery. Both denied any wrongdoing and an
appeal was pending at the end of the year.
Neither will be able to practise law upon
release unless their convictions are fully
overturned. 2
On 22 August, Jamshed Yorov, also a
defence lawyer in the IRPT case and the
brother of Buzurgmekhr Yorov, was detained
on charges of “divulging state secrets”. He
was accused of leaking the text of the
Supreme Court’s decision in the IRPT case.
He was released on 30 September.
A second trial against Buzurgmekhr Yorov
opened on 12 December at pre-trial
detention centre number 1 in Dushanbe. He
was accused of disrespecting the court and
insulting government officials in his final
statement to Dushanbe City Court.
356
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In May, legal safeguards against torture and
other ill-treatment of detainees were
strengthened. These included: reducing the
maximum length of time a person can be
held in detention without charge to three
days; defining detention as starting from the
moment of de facto deprivation of liberty;
giving detainees the right to confidential
access to a lawyer from the moment of
deprivation of liberty; and making medical
examinations of suspects obligatory prior to
placing them in temporary detention.
There were still no independent
mechanisms for the investigation of torture or
other ill-treatment. The NGO Coalition against
Torture registered 60 complaints of torture
but believed the real figure to be much
higher.
In September, the UN Human Rights
Council adopted the outcomes of the
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of
Tajikistan. The government rejected
recommendations to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and set up a National Preventive Mechanism.
It did, however, accept recommendations to
ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the
ICCPR and to fully abolish the death penalty.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The Ministry of Justice provided draft
regulations for the implementation of the
amended Law on Public Associations.
However, it failed to specify time limits for
decisions on the compulsory registration of
foreign funding for NGOs, or to clarify
whether a grant could be used before the
official registration. The draft regulations
limited inspections of NGOs to once every
two years, but left this rule and the grounds
for inspections open to wide interpretation.
In January a district court dismissed the
Tax Committee’s liquidation proceedings
against the established human rights and
democracy think tank, Nota Bene.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to impose further
restrictions on the media and reduced access
to independent information. In August the
government issued a five-year decree giving it
the right to “regulate and control” the content
of all television and radio networks through
the State Broadcasting Committee.
Independent media outlets and individual
journalists faced intimidation and harassment
by police and the security services for
covering the IRPT case and other politically
sensitive issues. Some were forced to leave
the country. In November, independent
newspaper Nigoh and independent website
Tojnews announced their closure because
“conditions no longer exist for independent
media and free journalism”. Nigoh had
reported on the trial of lawyer Buzurgmekhr
Yorov.
The authorities continued to order internet
service providers to block access to certain
news or social media sites, but without
acknowledging this publicly. Individuals and
groups affected by the measures were not
able to effectively challenge them in court. A
government decree also required internet
providers and telecommunications operators
to channel their services through a new
single communications centre under the
state-owned company Tajiktelecom. In
March, the UN Special Rapporteur on
freedom of expression expressed concern
that “the widespread blocking of websites
and networks, including mobile services...
was disproportionate and incompatible with
international standards”.
RIGHTS TO WATER AND SANITATION
In July the UN Special Rapporteur on the
human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation published his report on Tajikistan.
The report found that approximately 40% of
the population, and nearly half of the rural
population, relied on water supply sources
which were often insufficient or did not meet
water quality standards. This put a significant
burden on women and children, some of
whom spent on average four to six hours
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
each day fetching water. The Special
Rapporteur noted that the lack of water and
sanitation in public institutions in particular
had a direct negative impact on other rights,
such as the rights to health, education, work
and life. He urged the government to
eliminate disparities in access to water and
sanitation and to address the needs of the
most vulnerable groups, including women
and girls in rural areas, resettled people,
refugees, asylum-seekers and stateless
persons.
The government accepted
recommendations from the UPR process to
improve access to safe drinking water but
rejected recommendations to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the ICESCR.
1. Tajikistan: A year of secrecy, growing fears and deepening injustice
(EUR 60/4855/2016)
2. Tajikistan: A year of secrecy, growing fears and deepening injustice
(EUR 60/4855/2016)
TANZANIA
United Republic of Tanzania
Head of state: John Magufuli
Head of government: Kassim Majaliwa
Head of Zanzibar government: Ali Mohamed Shein
The rights to freedom of expression and of
peaceful assembly were restricted. The
authorities failed to address discrimination
on grounds of gender identity and sexual
orientation.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The months leading up to elections in
Zanzibar in March were marked by violence.
At least 200 people were injured, 12 women
sexually assaulted and one woman was
raped. More than 100 members of the
opposition Civic United Front (CUF),
including the Director of Publicity, were
arrested for protesting against the election re-
run, after the 2015 general elections were
nullified following claims of irregularities.
There were reports of excessive use of force
against CUF supporters by the police, and an
357unidentified armed group of masked men
using government registered vehicles.
Despite many complaints to the authorities,
no prosecutions were brought against the
police.
In June, all political rallies were banned by
the President until 2020. In response,
opposition parties called for peaceful protests
under the banner UKUTA (Alliance against
Dictatorship in Tanzania), which resulted in
the police extending the ban to include
internal party meetings. Two opposition
leaders and 35 supporters from both the
mainland and Zanzibar were arrested and
charged with various offences including
incitement to protest.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
Four media houses were closed and
journalists arrested and charged with various
offences under the Penal Code, the
Cybercrimes Act and the Newspapers Act.
The weekly Mawio was permanently closed
and three journalists were charged with
sedition for reporting on the elections in
Zanzibar and the ensuing political crisis. The
weekly Mseto was banned for three years for
breach of the Newspapers Act after it
published an article implicating a senior
government official in corruption. Radio
stations Radio Five and Magic FM were also
closed for allegedly airing seditious material.
Two women and six men were charged
under the Cybercrimes Act for posting
information about the elections and the
President on Facebook.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Tanzania failed to implement the
recommendations of the UN Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW Committee) in the 2015
case E.S. and S.C. v the United Republic of
Tanzania. The case, submitted before the
Committee in 2012, concerned two
Tanzanian widows who, under Tanzania’s
customary inheritance law, were denied the
right to inherit or administer the estates of
their late husbands. In 2016, the Committee
358
recommended reform of the Local Customary
Law (Declaration No.4) which discriminated
against women in relation to property
administration and inheritance rights.
A landmark court decision in September
declared unconstitutional Sections 13 and 17
of the Law of Marriage Act, which allowed
child marriage of girls aged under 18.
Tanzania has one of the highest child
marriage rates in the world, with 37% of girls
under 18 already married. The Attorney
General appealed against the ruling.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
The authorities began a crackdown on LGBTI
people, threatening to suspend organizations
that supported them. Staff were arrested and
documents confiscated during a raid of the
offices of the Community Health Education
Services and Advocacy in August.
Police arrested 20 LGBTI people in Dar es
Salaam in August. Most were held for more
than 48 hours before being released without
charge. In November, the authorities
suspended community-based HIV/AIDS
prevention programmes for gay men.
THAILAND
Kingdom of Thailand
Head of State: King Maha Vajiralongkorn
Bodindradebayavarangkun (replaced King Bhumibol
Adulyadej in December)
Head of Government: Prayut Chan-o-Cha
The military authorities further restricted
human rights. Peaceful political dissent,
whether through speech or protests, and
acts perceived as critical of the monarchy
were punished or banned. Politicians,
activists and human rights defenders faced
criminal investigations and prosecutions for,
among other things, campaigning against a
proposed Constitution and reporting on
state abuses. Many civilians were tried in
military courts. Torture and other ill-
treatment was widespread. Community land
rights activists faced arrest, prosecution
Amnesty International Report 2016/17and violence for opposing development
projects and advocating for the rights of
communities.
BACKGROUND
Thailand remained under the authority of the
National Council for Peace and Order
(NCPO), a group of military authorities which
have held power since a 2014 coup. The
August referendum approved a draft
Constitution that would allow the army to
retain considerable power. Elections were set
to follow in late 2017 at the earliest.
The prosecution of former Prime Minister
Yingluck Shinawatra for alleged criminal
negligence in the management of a
government rice subsidy scheme continued.
In October, the government ordered her to
pay a 35.7 billion baht (US$1 billion) fine
over the government losses from the scheme.
The EU remained unsatisfied with the
authorities’ progress to end illegal and
unregulated fishing and abusive labour
practices.
JUSTICE SYSTEM
The Head of the NCPO continued to use
extraordinary powers under Article 44 of the
interim Constitution to issue orders, some of
which arbitrarily restricted the exercise of
human rights, including peaceful political
activities. In March he issued an order
expanding the law enforcement powers of
military officers, which allowed officers to
detain individuals without court approval for a
broad range of criminal activities. 1
Civilians were tried before military courts
for violations of NCPO orders, crimes against
national security and insulting the monarchy.
In September, the Head of the NCPO issued
an order rescinding the military courts’
jurisdiction over cases involving civilians,
which was not retroactive. Trials continued in
military courts.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Peaceful critics were penalized for exercising
their rights to freedom of expression, of
peaceful assembly and of association.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
Individuals perceived as supporting
government critics – including relatives,
members of the public, lawyers and
journalists – also faced harassment
and prosecution.
The Constitutional Referendum Act, which
governed the August referendum, provided
for up to 10 years’ imprisonment for activities
and statements “causing confusion to affect
orderliness of voting”, including by using
“offensive” or “rude” language to influence
votes. The law was used to target those who
opposed the draft Constitution. More than
100 people were reportedly charged with
offences related to the referendum. 2
Amendments to the Computer Crimes Act
allowed for continued surveillance without
prior judicial authorization and failed to bring
the law in line with international law and
standards on the rights to privacy and
freedom of expression. The authorities also
considered increased online surveillance and
greater control of internet traffic.
Individuals were charged with or convicted
of offences under Article 112 of the Penal
Code for criticizing the monarchy. The Article
carried a prison sentence of up to 15 years.
Military courts interpreted the provisions
broadly and imposed sentences of up to 60
years’ imprisonment for convictions on
multiple counts of the offence, including
against people with mental illnesses. Bail was
routinely denied to those arrested under
Article 112.
Individuals were charged or convicted
under a ban on political gatherings of five or
more people imposed by a 2015 order from
the NCPO Head. It was used especially
against opposition political groups and pro-
democracy activists. In June, the authorities
initiated criminal proceedings against 19
members of the United Front for Democracy
against Dictatorship for holding a press
conference to celebrate the opening of a
centre to monitor the constitutional
referendum. Pro-democracy student activists
faced charges in multiple criminal cases for
peaceful protests and other public activities
opposing military rule and Thailand’s
draft Constitution.
359The authorities sought to silence those
raising concerns about torture and other ill-
treatment. In September, Amnesty
International was forced to cancel a press
conference in the capital Bangkok to launch
a report on torture, after officials threatened
to arrest the scheduled speakers. 3
Somchai Homla-or, Anchana Heemmina
and Pornpen Khongkachonkiet were charged
with criminal defamation and violations of the
Computer Crime Act for reporting on torture
by soldiers in southern Thailand. 4 A 25-year-
old woman faced similar charges after
campaigning to hold accountable military
officers responsible for the torture and killing
of her uncle, a military trainee.
Authorities cancelled many events
involving discussions about human rights or
political events. In October, immigration
officials detained and forcibly returned to
Hong Kong pro-democracy activist Joshua
Wong, who was invited to speak at a
commemoration of the 1976 massacre of
student protesters by Thai authorities. 5 the Computer Crimes Act. A gold mining
company had initiated criminal and civil
proceedings against at least 33 people who
opposed its operations. Andy Hall, a
migrants’ rights activist, was convicted in
September for his contribution to a report on
labour rights violations by a fruit company. 7
Human rights defenders, especially those
working on land issues or with community-
based organizations, faced harassment,
threats and physical violence. In April,
unidentified assailants shot and injured Supoj
Kansong, a land rights activist from the
Khlong Sai Pattana community in southern
Thailand. Four activists from that community
had previously been killed; by the end of the
year no one had been held accountable for
the killings. 8 In October, the Department of
Special Investigations informed human rights
lawyer Somchai Neelapaijit’s family that it was
closing its investigation into his enforced
disappearance in 2004, due to lack of
evidence.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTION There was little progress in government
negotiations to resolve a decades-long
conflict with ethnic-Malay separatists in
southern Thailand. Insurgents carried out
numerous attacks on military and civilian
targets in the region and both sides of the
conflict were accused of grave human rights
abuses. Insurgent groups targeted civilians
with bombings and, in March, attacked a
hospital in Narathiwat province.
The authorities continued to use Head of
NCPO Order 3/2015 to arbitrarily detain
individuals incommunicado for up to seven
days without charge for what became known
as “attitude adjustment” sessions. 6
Journalist Pravit Rojanaphruk, like many
others previously arbitrarily detained,
remained bound by restrictive conditions of
release. He was prevented from travelling to
Helsinki for a UNESCO World Press Freedom
Day event.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders faced prosecution,
imprisonment, harassment and physical
violence for their peaceful work. Sirikan
Charoensiri, a leading human rights lawyer,
was charged with multiple offences, including
sedition, for her legal work. She faced up to
15 years’ imprisonment.
Economic, social and cultural rights
activists were subject to prosecutions and
lawsuits initiated by private corporations,
often for alleged defamation or violations of
360
ARMED CONFLICT
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Members of the military continued to torture
individuals suspected of links to insurgents in
the south and political and security detainees
elsewhere, facilitated by laws and orders
allowing soldiers to detain individuals in
unofficial places of detention without judicial
oversight for up to seven days. 9 Two military
recruits reportedly died after alleged torture
in military camps. Torture and other ill-
treatment by the security forces in the
context of routine law enforcement operations
were also reported. Police officers and
soldiers were also responsible for human
Amnesty International Report 2016/17rights violations against members of
vulnerable communities, including migrant
workers, ethnic minorities, and suspected
drug users at police stations, roadblocks, and
various unofficial places of detention.
Thailand considered new legislation
criminalizing torture and enforced
disappearances. occupation (1975-1999) continued to
demand justice and reparations. Security
forces were accused of unlawful killings,
torture and other ill-treatment, arbitrary
arrests, and arbitrarily restricting the rights
to freedom of expression and of peaceful
assembly.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS In August, hundreds of civil society activists
gathered in the capital, Dili, at a parallel
conference to an ASEAN summit to discuss
human rights and other regional issues. In
November, Timor-Leste’s human rights record
was examined under the UN Universal
Periodic Review (UPR) process.
The legal system did not provide formal
recognition for refugees and asylum-seekers,
leaving many vulnerable to abuse. Asylum-
seekers, including children, faced months or
years of indefinite detention in crowded
immigration detention centres. Scores of
Rohingya people had remained in these
centres since they arrived by boat during a
regional migration crisis in 2015. The
authorities did not adequately address their
protection needs as asylum-seekers and
potential victims of human trafficking.
1. Thailand: Human rights groups condemn NCPO Order 13/2016 and
urge for it to be revoked immediately (ASA 39/3783/2016)
2. Thailand: Open letter on human rights concerns in the run-up to the
constitutional referendum (ASA 39/4548/2016)
3. Thailand: Torture victims must be heard (News story, 28 September)
4. Amnesty International Thailand’s Chair and other activists face jail
for exposing torture (News story, 25 July)
5. Thailand: Denial of entry to Hong Kong student activist a new blow to
freedom of expression (News story, 5 October)
6. Thailand: Prisoner of conscience must be released: Watana
Muangsook (ASA 39/3866/2016)
7. Thailand: Another human rights activist is unjustly targeted (News
story, 20 September)
8. Thailand: Authorities must protect human rights defenders in the line
of fire (ASA 39/3805/2016)
9. “Make him speak by tomorrow”: Torture and other ill-treatment in
Thailand (ASA 39/4747/2016)
TIMOR-LESTE
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
Head of state: Taur Matan Ruak
Head of government: Rui Maria de Araújo
BACKGROUND
IMPUNITY
A working group was established by the
Prime Minister in May to advise the
government on implementation of the
recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation (CAVR),
issued in 2005. Many recommendations
related to impunity had not been
implemented by the end of 2016. The
expulsion of non-Timorese judges in 2014
continued to hamper the trials of individuals
indicted for serious crimes.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Concerns remained about allegations of
unnecessary or excessive use of force, torture
and other ill-treatment by security forces, and
a lack of accountability. In August a member
of the Border Control Unit shot and killed a
man with mental illness in Suai. In the same
month a police officer hit a journalist in Dili.
By the end of the year, no one had been held
to account for the torture and other ill-
treatment of dozens of individuals detained
during joint security operations in Baucau
district in 2015. These were launched in
response to attacks allegedly carried out by
Mauk Moruk (Paulino Gama) and his banned
Maubere Revolutionary Council against police
in Laga and Baguia subdistricts. 1
Victims of serious human rights violations
committed during the Indonesian
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
361FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION BACKGROUND
In January, security forces ordered an activist
from the NGO Yayasan HAK to remove his T-
shirt saying “Free West Papua”. They also
threatened to arrest other human rights
activists for their role in organizing a peaceful
protest during a visit by the Indonesian
President and signing a joint statement
calling for accountability for crimes against
humanity during the Indonesian occupation. 2
On 11 April, two journalists were charged
in relation to a defamation lawsuit. In September, Togo ratified the Second
Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming
at the abolition of the death penalty.
Togo was examined under the UN
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process in
October. 1 Concerns by UN member states
included impunity and restrictions on
freedom of expression and freedom of
peaceful assembly. States also raised
concerns about the failure of the authorities
to guarantee free birth registration, which can
undermine children’s access to education,
health care and other social services.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Gender-based violence remained a significant
issue. A survey revealed that three in five
women between the ages of 15 and 49, who
had ever been in a relationship, had suffered
sexual or other physical violence by a
husband or male partner in their lifetime. In
April, Timor-Leste became the third southeast
Asian state to adopt a National Action Plan
for Women, Peace and Security for
2016-2020.
1. Timor-Leste: Still no justice – submission to the UN Universal
Periodic Review, November 2016 (ASA 57/4531/2016)
2. Timor-Leste: Harassed for organizing peaceful rally (ASA
57/3334/2016)
TOGO
Togolese Republic
Head of state: Faure Gnassingbé
Head of government: Komi Sélom Klassou
Security forces continued to use excessive
force against demonstrators. Arbitrary
arrests and detentions, torture and other ill-
treatment, and impunity for human rights
violations persisted. A law revising the
Criminal Code was adopted to make torture
not subject to prescription under Togolese
law. Other legislative developments
undermined the independence of the
National Human Rights Commission and
the right to freedom of association.
362
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In January, police and gendarmerie officers
threw tear gas canisters at the University of
Lomé during a protest in which five students
and three members of the security forces
were injured.
In August, the security forces injured at
least 10 people during a protest in Abobo-
Zéglé. People were protesting against
evictions from their land to make room for
phosphate extraction. During the protest,
security forces charged them with tear gas,
batons and live ammunition. The community
considered they had not received adequate
compensation for their eviction.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In October, the National Assembly adopted a
revision of the Criminal Code which defined
torture in line with the UN Convention against
Torture and made it an imprescriptible crime.
Cases of torture and other ill-treatment
continued to be reported throughout the year.
In June, three police officers arrested
Ibrahim Agriga at his home in Guerin Kouka.
He was taken to a police station and beaten
with batons on his buttocks and the soles of
his feet to make him “confess” to a
motorbike theft. He was released without
charge after three days and filed a complaint
with the tribunal of Guerin Kouka. No
investigation was known to have been
initiated at the end of the year.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities continued to subject people
to arbitrary detention, in particular those who
expressed dissent.
On 1 April, Adamou Moussa and Zékeria
Namoro were arbitrarily detained in Dapaong
after they had called for justice for people
killed during protests in Mango in November
2015; seven civilians and one police officer
were killed. During their interrogation, the
gendarmes accused Zékeria Namoro of
sharing information on the human rights
situation in Mango with journalists, diaspora
groups and human rights organizations. The
men were charged with “incitement to
commit a crime” and released on bail on 6
September.
Five men remained in detention without
trial in relation to the November 2015
demonstrations in Mango. There were
concerns that they may be held solely
because they were the organizers of the
protest.
Seven out of 10 men convicted in
September 2011 for participating in a 2009
coup plot, including Kpatcha Gnassingbé,
half-brother of the President, remained in
detention at the end of 2016.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In April, the Council of Ministers adopted a
bill on freedom of association which failed to
meet international standards. It stated that
“foreign or international associations”
required prior authorization to operate in
Togo. The law also provided that associations
must respect national laws and morals. This
could be used to discriminate against
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex people, as sexual relations between
consenting adults of the same sex remained
a crime. The bill also provided that
associations may be dissolved on the basis of
a decision of the Council of Ministers or the
Minister of Territorial Administration in the
case of “foreign and international
associations”. Finally, it granted tax
incentives to associations which accepted
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
increased government control over their
objectives and activities.
IMPUNITY
The climate of impunity for human rights
violations persisted.
In March, a law was adopted on freedom
to access to information and public
documentation to facilitate greater
transparency and accountability. However, in
April, the National Assembly adopted a new
Code of Military Justice which will fuel
impunity as it gives military courts the power
to investigate and judge ordinary criminal
offences committed by military personnel,
including rape and torture. The courts’
jurisdiction extended to civilians.
In March, the National Human Rights
Commission published its report on the
November 2015 demonstrations in Mango.
Despite its conclusion that “a lack of
professionalism of certain elements of the
security and law enforcement forces and the
insufficiency of the elements deployed” led
to “an excessive use of force”, no member of
the security forces had been brought to trial
and none of the victims had received
compensation at the end of 2016.
More than 11 years have passed since the
deaths of nearly 500 people during the
violence surrounding the presidential election
of 24 April 2005, the authorities have taken
no steps to identify those responsible for the
deaths. Of the 72 complaints filed by the
victims’ families with the Atakpamé, Amlamé
and Lomé courts, none are known to have
been fully investigated.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In March, the National Assembly adopted a
law enabling the President to appoint
members of the National Human Rights
Commission without parliamentary oversight.
The law also established the National
Preventive Mechanism – aimed at preventing
and investigating cases of torture – within the
National Human Rights Commission, raising
concerns about its ability to function
independently.
3631. Togo: The participating states to the UPR review must call for the
protection of the rights to freedom of association, peaceful assembly
and expression in Togo (AFR 03/5064/2016)
TUNISIA
Republic of Tunisia
Head of state: Beji Caid Essebsi
Head of government: Youssef Chahed (replaced Habib
Essid in August)
The authorities continued to restrict the
rights to freedom of expression and of
assembly, and used emergency powers and
anti-terrorism laws to impose arbitrary
restrictions on liberty and freedom of
movement. There were new reports of
torture and other ill-treatment of detainees.
Women remained subject to discrimination
in law and practice and were inadequately
protected against gender-based violence.
Same-sex sexual relations remained
criminalized, and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people
faced arrest and imprisonment. Courts
continued to impose death sentences; there
were no executions.
BACKGROUND
The authorities renewed the nationwide state
of emergency in force since November 2015
and announced in February that they had
completed the construction of a security wall
along Tunisia’s border with Libya. Despite
this, armed clashes between government
forces and Libya-based members of the
armed group Islamic State (IS) continued in
border areas. On 7 March, at least 68 people
were killed, including seven civilians, in
clashes that ensued when government forces
repulsed an IS attack on military bases and a
police station in Ben Guerdane, a southern
border town. Clashes between armed groups
and the security forces continued on the
border with Algeria with fatalities on both
sides.
New members of the Supreme Judicial
Council, which is responsible for the
364
selection, appointment, transfer, removal,
discipline and training of judges and
prosecutors, were announced in October.
The establishment of the Supreme Judicial
Council finally allowed for the creation of the
Constitutional Court, as it is responsible for
appointing a third of the Court’s members.
Parliament approved a proposed law
criminalizing racial and other discrimination;
it had still to be enacted at the end of the
year.
The UN Committee against Torture and the
UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights reviewed Tunisia’s human
rights record in May and September
respectively. The UN Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture visited Tunisia in April.
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE
The Truth and Dignity Commission, created
to address political, social and economic
crimes and investigate human rights
violations committed between 1 July 1955
and December 2013, reported in June that it
had received more than 62,000 complaints
concerning a wide range of human rights
violations, including arbitrary detentions,
torture, unfair trials, sexual violence and
religious and ethnic discrimination. The
Commission’s first public hearings were held
on 17 November.
Parliament resumed consideration of a
controversial draft law in June that would
offer immunity for some financial crimes.
Discussion of the proposed law, first
proposed by President Essebsi, was
suspended in 2015 following protests led by
the popular movement Manich Msameh (“I
will not forgive”). If adopted, the proposed
law would offer officials and business
executives accused of corruption and
embezzlement under the administration of
former President Zine El ‘Abidine Ben ‘Ali an
amnesty and immunity from further
prosecution if they return the proceeds of
their crimes. Its immunity provisions would
also undermine investigations under the
transitional justice process. The draft law had
not been enacted at the end of the year.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS,
AND FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
The authorities used their powers under the
state of emergency to conduct thousands of
arrests and house searches, in many cases
without judicial warrants. The authorities
subjected hundreds of people to
administrative house arrest, assigned places
of residence, travel bans or restrictions on
movement – measures that curtailed their
social and economic rights, including the
right to work.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Security officials harassed and intimidated
many families of people they suspected of
joining or supporting armed groups,
repeatedly raiding and searching their
homes, threatening and interrogating them,
harassing them at their places of work and
restricting their freedom of movement.
Security officials also harassed and
intimidated dozens of former prisoners
sentenced under repressive laws during the
former Ben ’Ali administration and other
people on account of their appearance,
including men with beards and men and
women dressed in what officials deemed to
be religious clothing.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There were new reports of torture and other
ill-treatment of detainees, mostly during
arrest and in pre-charge detention. Several of
those detained following the attack in Ben
Guerdane in March alleged that police and
counter-terrorism officers tortured them
during interrogation in both Ben Guerdane
and the capital, Tunis. They said officers
subjected them to the “roast chicken”
method of torture – rotating them on a pole
inserted between their handcuffed wrists and
feet – as well as beatings, sexual assault and
prolonged solitary confinement. While some
were released, others remained in detention
at the end of the year.
Parliament approved changes to the Code
of Criminal Procedures in February,
strengthening safeguards against torture and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
other ill-treatment, which took effect in June.
The reforms cut the maximum period that a
detainee can be held without charge from six
to four days and gave those detained the
rights of immediate access to a lawyer and
their family and to have their lawyer present
at their interrogation. The new provisions also
required that detentions be authorized by
prosecutors and that prosecutors and judicial
police must allow detainees access to
medical care and doctors if they or their
lawyers or families request it. The reforms did
not, however, affect the authorities’ powers to
detain without charge suspects arrested for
terrorism-related offences for up to 15 days,
and allowed authorities to deny them access
to a lawyer for 48 hours and interrogate them
without the presence of their lawyer. In
March, the government appointed the 16
members of the National Body for the
Prevention of Torture, which was created
under a 2013 law and was a requirement for
Tunisia as a party to the Optional Protocol to
the UN Convention against Torture. A lack of
clarity regarding its function and financing
hampered its ability to operate fully.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities used their powers under the
state of emergency to ban strikes and
demonstrations, forcibly disperse gatherings
deemed to threaten public order, and control
and censor print, broadcast and other media
and publications. Despite this, there were
new protests against unemployment,
underdevelopment particularly in Tunisia’s
interior regions, and poor living conditions.
The police dispersed such protests,
reportedly using excessive force in some
cases.
In January, protests against unemployment
erupted in Kasserine after an unemployed
graduate was electrocuted while climbing a
utility pole in protest at being rejected for a
government job. The protests quickly spread
to other cities. The authorities arrested
hundreds of protesters and bystanders, some
of whom were prosecuted and sentenced to
prison terms. They included 37 men who
365were arrested in Gabès on 22 January and
sentenced to prison terms of between one
and three years on charges of “breaking the
curfew”.
In April, demonstrators in El Kef protesting
against unemployment said the police used
excessive force to disperse them.
The authorities continued to restrict
freedom of expression under criminal
defamation laws enacted by the Ben ’Ali
administration. In August, police arrested
blogger Salwa Ayyari, her husband and four
of her children outside the Presidential
Palace in Tunis. They were held without food
or water and denied access to a lawyer for
several hours during which police officers
insulted and ill-treated Salwa Ayyari, beating
her and fracturing her arm. They were then
moved to another police station where she
was accused of attacking the officer who
fractured her arm. Salwa Ayyari and her
family were released after 13 hours’
detention, but she was charged with insulting
the President, which carries a penalty of
imprisonment for up to two years, and
assaulting a police officer. In December, she
was acquitted of insulting the President and
fined 200 Tunisian Dinar (US$86) for the
charge of assaulting an officer.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and in practice and were inadequately
protected against sexual and gender-based
violence. The Penal Code failed to explicitly
criminalize marital rape and allowed men
who raped women aged 15 to 20, or who
abducted girls under the age of 18, to escape
prosecution if their victim consented to marry
them.
Existing social and health services for
survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence were limited and inadequate. Among
other necessary aspects of care, survivors of
rape faced particular difficulties in accessing
pregnancy prevention and psychological
support. In addition, lack of protection
mechanisms, including shelters for women
and girl survivors of violence, left survivors
vulnerable to further abuse.
366
In July the Council of Ministers approved a
draft law to combat violence against women
and girls, and submitted it for parliamentary
consideration. The draft law focused on
addressing shortcomings in existing law and
practice and improving access to protection
and services for survivors. It had not been
enacted at the end of the year.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
LGBTI people continued to face arrest under
Article 230 of the Penal Code, which
criminalized consensual same-sex sexual
relations. They also faced violence,
exploitation and sexual and other abuse by
police. Transgender people faced arrest and
prosecution under laws that criminalize
“indecency” and acts deemed offensive to
public morals.
The authorities subjected men accused of
same-sex sexual relations to forced anal
examinations, in violation of the prohibition of
torture.
In March, the Sousse Court of Appeal
confirmed the guilty verdict of six men on
sodomy charges under Article 230 but
reduced their three-year prison sentence to
time already served and overturned their five-
year banishment order from Kairouan. The
men had been arrested and sentenced in
December 2015 by the Kairouan Court of
First Instance. In April, a court in Tunis
acquitted eight men who were arrested in
March and charged under Article 230. They
were acquitted due to lack of evidence as
they had not been subjected to forced anal
examinations.
LGBTI rights activists also faced
harassment and abuse. In January, the Court
of First Instance in Tunis ordered the
suspension of the LGBTI rights group Shams
for 30 days in response to a government
allegation that Shams had breached the law
on associations by stating that it aimed to
“defend homosexuals”. Shams won an
appeal against the Court’s ruling in February.
In April, a televised verbal attack against
LGBTI people by a leading Tunisian actor
sparked an outbreak of homophobia that saw
Amnesty International Report 2016/17restaurants, internet cafés, grocery stores
and taxis display posters barring LGBTI
people. In May, the UN Committee against
Torture criticized the criminalization of
consensual same-sex sexual relations, urged
the authorities to repeal Article 230 of the
Penal Code, and condemned forced anal
examinations.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions have been carried
out since 1991.
TURKEY
Republic of Turkey
Head of state: Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
Head of government: Binali Yildirim (replaced Ahmet
Davutoğlu in May)
An attempted coup prompted a massive
government crackdown on civil servants and
civil society. Those accused of links to the
Fethullah Gülen movement were the main
target. Over 40,000 people were remanded
in pre-trial detention during six months of
emergency rule. There was evidence of
torture of detainees in the wake of the coup
attempt. Nearly 90,000 civil servants were
dismissed; hundreds of media outlets and
NGOs were closed down and journalists,
activists and MPs were detained. Violations
of human rights by security forces
continued with impunity, especially in the
predominantly Kurdish southeast of the
country, where urban populations were held
under 24-hour curfew. Up to half a million
people were displaced in the country. The
EU and Turkey agreed a “migration deal” to
prevent irregular migration to the EU; this
led to the return of hundreds of refugees
and asylum-seekers and less criticism by
EU bodies of Turkey’s human rights record.
BACKGROUND
President Erdoğan consolidated power
throughout the year. Constitutional
amendments aimed at granting the President
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
executive powers were submitted to the
Parliament in December.
Armed clashes between the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) and state forces
continued, mainly in the majority Kurdish
east and southeast of the country. The
government replaced elected mayors from 53
municipalities with government trustees; 49
mayors were from the Kurdish, opposition
Democratic Regions Party (DBP). Along with
many elected local officials, nine MPs from
the Kurdish-rooted left-wing Peoples’
Democracy Party (HDP) were remanded in
pre-trial detention in November. 1 A UN fact-
finding mission to the south-east was blocked
by the authorities who also obstructed
national and international NGOs, including
Amnesty International, from documenting
human rights abuses in the region.
In March, the EU and Turkey agreed a
“migration deal” aimed at preventing
irregular migration from Turkey to the EU. It
also resulted in muting EU criticism of
human rights abuses in Turkey.
On 15 July, factions within the armed
forces launched a violent coup attempt. It
was quickly suppressed in part by ordinary
people taking to the streets to face down
tanks. The authorities announced the death
toll to be 237 people including 34 coup
plotters and 2,191 people injured, during a
night of violence that saw the Parliament
bombed and other state and civilian
infrastructure attacked.
Following the coup attempt the
government announced a three-month state
of emergency, extended for a further three
months in October, derogating from a list of
articles in the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the European
Convention on Human Rights. The
government passed a series of executive
decrees that failed to uphold even these
reduced standards. Nearly 90,000 civil
servants including teachers, police and
military officials, doctors, judges and
prosecutors were dismissed from their
positions on the grounds of links to a terrorist
organization or threat to national security.
Most were presumed to be based on
367allegations of links to Fethullah Gülen, a
former government ally whom the
government accused of masterminding the
coup. There was no clear route in law to
appeal these decisions. At least 40,000
people were remanded in pre-trial detention
accused of links to the coup or the Gülen
movement, classified by the authorities as the
Fethullah Gülen Terrorist Organisation
(FETÖ).
In August, Turkey launched a military
intervention in northern Syria, targeting the
armed group Islamic State (IS) and the
Peoples’ Defence Forces, the PKK-affiliated
Kurdish armed group. In October Parliament
extended a mandate for Turkey to conduct
military interventions in Iraq and Syria for
another year.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression deteriorated sharply
during the year. After the declaration of a
state of emergency, 118 journalists were
remanded in pre-trial detention and 184
media outlets were arbitrarily and
permanently closed down under executive
decrees, leaving opposition media severely
restricted. 2 People expressing dissent,
especially in relation to the Kurdish issue,
were subjected to threats of violence and
criminal prosecution. Internet censorship
increased. At least 375 NGOs, including
women’s rights groups, lawyers’ associations
and humanitarian organizations, were shut by
executive decree in November.
In March, a court in the capital Ankara
appointed a trustee to the opposition Zaman
media group in relation to an ongoing
terrorism-related investigation. After police
stormed Zaman offices, a pro-government
editorial was imposed on the group’s
newspapers and television channels. In July,
Zaman group media outlets were
permanently closed down along with other
Gülen-linked media. New titles, set up after
the government take over of the Zaman
group, were also shut down.
In May, Cumhuriyet editor-in-chief Can
Dündar and the daily’s Ankara representative
Erdem Gül were convicted of “revealing state
368
secrets” and sentenced to
five years and ten months’ imprisonment and
five years’ imprisonment respectively, for
publishing articles alleging that Turkey’s
authorities had attempted to covertly ship
weapons to armed opposition groups in Syria.
The government claimed the trucks were
sending humanitarian supplies to Turkmens.
The case remained pending on appeal at the
end of the year. In October, a further 10
journalists were remanded in pre-trial
detention for committing crimes on behalf of
both FETÖ and the PKK.
In August, police closed the offices of the
main Kurdish daily Özgür Gündem on the
basis of a court order for its closure due to
ongoing terrorism investigations, a sanction
not provided for in law. Two editors and two
journalists were detained pending trial and
prosecuted for terrorism offences. Three were
released in December while editor İnan
Kızıkaya remained in detention. 3 In October
under an executive decree, Özgür Gündem
was permanently closed down along with all
the major Kurdish-orientated national media.
Signatories to a January petition by
Academics for Peace calling for a return to
peace negotiations and recognition of the
demands of the Kurdish political movement
were subjected to threats of violence,
administrative investigation and criminal
prosecution. Four signatories were detained
until a court hearing in April; they were
released but not acquitted. 4 By the end of the
year, 490 of the academics were under
administrative investigation and 142 had
been dismissed. Since the coup, more than
1,100 of the signatories were formally under
criminal investigation.
Internet censorship increased, with the
authorities issuing orders rubber-stamped by
the judiciary to withdraw or block content
including websites and social media
accounts, to which there was no effective
appeal. In October, the authorities cut
internet services across southeast Turkey and
engaged in throttling of various social media
services.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities banned the annual May Day
marches in Istanbul for the fourth year
running, and the annual Pride march in
Istanbul for a second year running, on
spurious grounds. Police used excessive
force against people peacefully attempting to
go ahead with these marches. After July, the
authorities used state of emergency laws to
issue blanket bans preventing
demonstrations in cities across Turkey. And
again, the police used excessive force against
people attempting to exercise the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly regardless of
the bans.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There was an increase in cases of torture and
other ill-treatment reported in police
detention, from curfew areas in southeast
Turkey and then more markedly in Ankara
and Istanbul in the immediate aftermath of
the coup attempt. Investigations into abuses
were ineffective.
The state of emergency removed
protections for detainees and allowed
previously banned practices, which helped
facilitate torture and other ill-treatment: the
maximum pre-charge detention period was
increased from four to 30 days; and facilities
to block detainees’ access to lawyers in pre-
charge detention for five days, and to record
conversations between client and lawyer in
pre-trial detention and pass them to
prosecutors were introduced. Detainees’
access to lawyers and the right to consult
with their choice of lawyers – rather than
state-provided lawyers – was further
restricted. Medical examinations were carried
out in the presence of police officers and the
reports arbitrarily denied to detainees’
lawyers.
No national mechanism for the
independent monitoring of places of
detention existed following the abolition of the
Human Rights Institution in April, and the
non-functioning of its successor body. The
Council of Europe Committee for the
Prevention of Torture visited detention
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
facilities in August and reported to the
Turkish authorities in November. However,
the government did not publish the report by
the end of the year. The UN Special
Rapporteur on torture visited in November,
after his visit was delayed on the request of
the Turkish authorities.
The authorities professed their adherence
to “zero tolerance for torture” policies but on
occasion, spokespeople summarily dismissed
reports against them, stating that coup
plotters deserved abuse and that allegations
would not be investigated. The authorities
accused Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch of being tools for the “FETÖ
terrorist organization” following the NGOs’
joint publication on torture and ill-treatment. 5
Three lawyers’ associations that worked on
police violence and torture were shut down in
November under an executive decree.
Lawyers said that 42 people, detained in
Nusaybin in May after clashes between PKK-
affiliated individuals and state forces were
beaten and subjected to other ill-treatment in
police detention. They said that the group,
which included adults and children, were
hooded, beaten during police interrogation
and not able to access appropriate medical
care for their injuries.
Widespread torture and other ill-treatment
of suspects accused of taking part in the
coup attempt was reported in its immediate
aftermath. In July, severe beatings, sexual
assault, threats of rape and cases of rape
were reported, as thousands were detained in
official and unofficial police detention.
Military officers appeared to be targeted for
the worst physical abuse but holding
detainees in stress positions and keeping
them handcuffed behind their backs,
and denying them adequate food and water
or toilet breaks were reported to have taken
place on a far wider scale. Lawyers and
detainees’ relatives were often not informed
that individuals had been detained until they
were brought for charge.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Until June, the security forces conducted
security operations against armed individuals
369affiliated to the PKK, who had dug trenches
and erected barricades in urban areas in the
southeast of Turkey. The authorities’ use of
extended round-the-clock curfews, a total
ban on people leaving their homes,
combined with the presence of heavy
weaponry including tanks in populated areas,
was a disproportionate and abusive response
to a serious security concern and may have
amounted to collective punishment. 6
Evidence suggests that the security forces’
operated a shoot-to-kill policy against armed
individuals that also caused deaths and
injuries to unarmed residents and
widespread forced displacement.
In January, IMC TV journalist Refik Tekin
was shot while bringing injured people to
receive medical treatment in Cizre, a city
under curfew. He continued recording after
being shot, apparently from an armoured
police vehicle. He was later detained and
investigated under terrorism laws.
IMPUNITY
The entrenched culture of impunity for
abuses committed by the security forces
remained. The authorities failed to investigate
allegations of widespread human rights
violations in the southeast, where few or none
of the basic steps were taken to process
cases, including deaths, and in some
instances witnesses were subjected to
threats. In June, legislative amendments
required the investigation of military officials
for conduct during security operations to be
subject to government permission and for
any resulting trial to take place in military
courts, which have proved especially weak in
prosecuting officials for human rights abuses.
Government statements dismissing
allegations of torture and ill-treatment in
police detention after the coup attempt were
a worrying departure.
Despite the ratification of the Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women (Istanbul
Convention), the authorities made little or no
progress in halting pervasive domestic
violence against women nor did they adopt
procedures to investigate the hate motive in
370
cases of people perceived to have been killed
due to their sexual orientation or gender
identity.
No progress was made in investigations
into the deaths of some 130 people who died
while sheltering from clashes in three
basements during the curfew in Cizre in
February. The authorities alleged that access
for ambulances was blocked by the PKK
when local sources reported that people in
the basements were injured and needed
emergency medical care, and died of their
injuries or were killed when security forces
stormed the buildings.
The Governor of Ağrı province in eastern
Turkey denied permission for an investigation
against police officers to proceed into the
deaths of two youths, aged 16 and 19 in
Diyadin. The authorities claimed that police
shot the youths in self-defence but a ballistics
report showed that a gun found at the scene
had not been fired and did not have either of
the youths’ fingerprints on it.
The authorities failed to make progress in
investigation of the November 2015 killing of
Tahir Elci, Head of the Diyarbakir Bar
Association and a prominent human rights
defender. It was hampered by an incomplete
crime scene investigation and missing CCTV
footage.
More than three years on, investigations
into use of force by police at Gezi Park
protests had failed and resulted in only a
handful of unsatisfactory prosecutions. The
court issued a 10,100 liras (€3,000) fine to
the police officer in his retrial for the fatal
shooting of Ankara protester Ethem
Sarisülük. A court reduced the compensation
awarded to Dilan Dursun by 75% – she had
been left with permanent injuries after being
hit in the head by a tear gas canister fired by
police during protests in Ankara on the day of
Ethem Sarisülük’s funeral. The court ruled
that she had culpability given that it was an
“illegal demonstration”.
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
There was a sharp increase in indiscriminate
attacks and attacks directly targeting
civilians, showing contempt for the right to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17life and the principle of humanity. IS, PKK, its
offshoot Kurdistan Freedom Falcons (TAK)
and Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party-
Front were blamed or claimed responsibility
for the attacks.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Turkey was the world’s biggest host of
refugees and asylum-seekers with an
estimated 3 million refugees and asylum-
seekers residing in the country with
significant populations of Afghans and Iraqis
alongside 2.75 million registered Syrians,
who were provided with temporary protection
status. The EU concluded a migration deal
with Turkey in March aimed at preventing
irregular migration to the EU. It provided for
the return of refugees and asylum-seekers to
Turkey, ignoring many gaps in protection
there. 7 Turkey’s border with Syria remained
effectively closed. Despite improvements, the
majority of Syrian refugee children had no
access to education and most adult Syrian
refugees had no access to lawful
employment. Many refugee families, without
adequate subsistence, lived in destitution.
There were mass forced returns of Syrians
by the Turkish security forces in the early
months of the year, as well as instances of
unlawful push-backs to Syria and cases of
fatal and non-fatal shootings of people in
need of protection by Turkish border guards.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
Hundreds of thousands of people were
displaced from the areas under curfew in the
southeast of Turkey. The imposition of
curfews with only hours’ warning forced
people to leave with few, if any, possessions.
In many cases, displaced people were not
able to access their social and economic
rights such as adequate housing and
education. They were offered inadequate
compensation for loss of possessions and
livelihoods. Their right to return was severely
compromised by the high levels of
destruction and the announcement of
redevelopment projects likely to exclude
former residents. 8
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
1. Turkey: HDP deputies detained amid growing onslaught on Kurdish
opposition voices (News story, 4 November)
2. Turkey: Massive crackdown on media in Turkey (EUR 44/5112/2016)
3. Turkey: End pre-trial detention of Özgür Gündem guest editors (EUR
44/4303/2016)
4. Turkey: Further information − academics targeted for peace appeal,
released (EUR 44/3902/2016)
5. Joint Statement: Turkey − state of emergency provisions violate
human rights and should be revoked (EUR 44/5012/2016)
6. Turkey: Security operations in southeast Turkey risk return to
widespread human rights violations seen in the 1990s (EUR
44/4366/2016)
7. Turkey: No safe refuge − asylum-seekers and refugees denied
effective protection in Turkey (EUR 44/3825/2016)
8. Turkey: Displaced and dispossessed − Sur residents’ right to return
home (EUR 44/5213/2016)
TURKMENISTAN
Turkmenistan
Head of state and government:
Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov
Human rights did not improve, despite a
National Human Rights Action Plan for
2016-2020 launched in April. Independent
civil society organizations could not operate
freely. Turkmenistan remained closed to
independent human rights monitors.
Freedoms of expression, association and
religion were heavily restricted and limits on
freedom of movement were retained. Sex
between men remained a criminal offence.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Media remained subject to state control and
no independent media outlets were able to
operate. The authorities continued to harass
and intimidate journalists, including those
based outside Turkmenistan.
Freelance journalist Saparmamed
Nepeskuliev remained in prison. He had
reported on corruption and was convicted in
August 2015 on drug-related offences.
Access to the internet was monitored and
restricted; social networking sites were
frequently blocked.
371FORCED LABOUR
The government continued to use forced
labour in the cotton-picking industry, one of
the largest in the world. To harvest the cotton,
local authorities compel public sector
workers, including teachers, medical staff
and civil servants, to pick and to meet
individual government-set quotas or risk
losing their jobs. Children often help their
parents meeting the quotas. The ILO
Committee of Experts on the Application of
Conventions and Recommendations urged
Turkmenistan to end practices that give rise
to forced labour in the cotton industry.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
A law to establish a Human Rights
Commissioner (Ombudsman) was still under
development.
A new Constitution was adopted on 16
September. It extended the presidential
tenure to seven years and removed a
previous presidential age limit.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The whereabouts of prisoners who were
subjected to enforced disappearance after an
alleged assassination attempt on then
President Saparmurat Niyazov in 2002
remained unknown.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
In the town of Dashoguz, bearded men under
50 years were detained and questioned
about their religious beliefs and practices,
and some were forcibly shaved, according to
the Alternative Turkmenistan News service.
The new Law on Freedom of Conscience
and Religious Organizations was signed into
law in March. It retained an earlier ban on
exercising freedom of religion and belief with
others without state permission. Under the
new law, religious groups need to have 50
founding members to register, rather than
five, as stipulated in the previous law.
Conscientious objectors faced criminal
prosecution. Forum 18, a human rights
organization promoting religious freedom,
372
reported that a young Jehovah’s Witness was
sentenced to corrective labour for refusing to
perform his military service.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Former prisoners told Alternative
Turkmenistan News about poor prison
conditions and treatment in detention
amounting to torture and other ill-treatment.
According to these accounts, prison officers
beat prisoners and forced them to stand
outside for long periods in high temperatures.
Prison officers also practised extortion.
Prisons were overcrowded and prisoners not
provided with adequate food. Some prisoners
had to sleep on the floor or in the prison yard.
Tuberculosis rates were high and infected
prisoners did not always receive appropriate
treatment.
Reports continued to be received on the
use of torture or ill-treatment by law
enforcement officers to force detainees to
“confess” and incriminate others. Activist
Mansur Mingelov remained in prison. He was
convicted in 2012 after an unfair trial for drug
offences after publicizing information on
torture and other ill-treatment of Baloch
ethnic community members in Mary
province.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
Turkmenistan remained closed to
international scrutiny and rejected or failed to
respond to requests from the UN Special
Rapporteurs to visit the country.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
Citizens have not needed “exit visas” to leave
the country since 2006. But arbitrary
restrictions on the right to travel abroad
remained in practice: they targeted, among
others, relatives of people accused of
involvement in the alleged attempt to
assassinate President Niyazov in 2002,
relatives of members of the opposition
resident abroad, as well as civil society
activists, students, journalists and former
migrant workers.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17UGANDA
Republic of Uganda
Head of state and government: Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and assembly were severely
restricted in the context of general elections
marred by irregularities. Human rights
defenders faced new restrictions on their
activities and some organizations were
harassed. The rights of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
people continued to be violated.
BACKGROUND
Uganda held its fifth presidential and
parliamentary elections on 18 February. The
Commonwealth election observation mission
said the election fell short of key democratic
benchmarks. The EU’s election observation
mission said the election took place in an
“intimidating atmosphere”, with the police
using excessive force against opposition
politicians, media workers and the general
public. President Museveni was declared the
winner on 20 February. He had already been
in power for 30 years.
On 1 March, Amama Mbabazi, an
opposition presidential candidate, filed a
petition in the Supreme Court contesting the
election result on the grounds that the
incumbent party bribed voters, used public
servants and state resources in political
activities, and interfered with opposition
activities. On 9 March, when affidavits were
due to be submitted in court, files and
computers were stolen from the offices of two
of his lawyers. On 31 March, the Supreme
Court ruled that there was not enough
evidence of irregularities that would have
affected the election result.
FREEDOMS OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
Police severely restricted the rights of political
opposition parties to freedom of association
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
and peaceful assembly before, during and
after the elections.
Three days before the elections, Kizza
Besigye, presidential candidate for the
opposition Forum for Democratic Change
(FDC), was arrested as he headed towards a
campaign rally. The police subsequently
barricaded the road leading to his house,
effectively placing him under house arrest, on
the grounds that they had intelligence that he
intended to cause unrest. On 20 February he
was arrested again when he tried to leave his
house to obtain detailed copies of the results
from the Electoral Commission in order to
contest them. 1 On 12 May, the day before
Yoweri Museveni was to be sworn in as
President, a video appeared online showing
Kizza Besigye being sworn in, claiming to be
the people’s President. The police
immediately arrested him and charged him
with treason. The case was continuing at the
end of the year.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In the run-up to the elections, security
officials attacked media outlets they deemed
critical of government policies and actions.
On 20 January, Endigyito FM, a privately
owned radio station, was closed down after
opposition candidate Amama Mbabazi was a
guest on a show.
On 13 February, police entered Radio
North FM in Lira, northern Uganda, and
arrested journalist Richard Mungu and a
guest. The police accused Richard Mungu of
defacing President Museveni’s election
posters and charged him with malicious
damage to property. The charges were later
amended to aiding and abetting a crime, an
apparent reference to the damaged posters.
He was released on bail on 17 February.
On election day, the official Uganda
Communications Commission (UCC) blocked
access to Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp
between 6am and 9.30am, citing an
unspecified threat to national security. The
Mobile Telecommunications Network (MTN),
a leading provider of mobile phone and
internet services in Uganda, said on its
Twitter handle that the UCC had ordered it to
373disable all social media and mobile money-
transferring services “due to a threat to
public order and safety”. Such actions
violated the right to seek and receive
information.
The Deputy Chief Justice stopped a
peaceful demonstration organized by the
FDC and Kizza Besigye planned for 5 May.
His order followed an application by the
Deputy Attorney General for interim orders to
prevent FDC’s “defiance campaign”. The
FDC’s campaign sought, among other things,
an international audit to review the
presidential election results. However, the
Court of Appeal ruled on 30 April that the
campaign breached several articles of the
Constitution.
On 14 September, 25 women were
arrested and detained for four hours, before
being released without charge, shortly before
they were to present a petition to Parliament.
The petition opposed proposed amendments
to mandatory retirement ages for judicial
officers and electoral commissioners set out
in the Constitution. The Speaker of the
Parliament rejected the bill and asked the
government to table comprehensive
constitutional amendments instead.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 28 November, at least 100 people were
killed and 139 others arrested in clashes
between security agencies and palace guards
in the western town of Kasese, according to
police. 2 In some cases, security forces
summarily shot people dead and then
dumped the bodies on river banks and in
bushes. The clashes followed attacks by the
local king’s guards on several police stations
on 26 November, during which at least 14
police officers were killed. Charles Wesley
Mumbere, King of the Rwenzururu kingdom,
was arrested and transferred to the capital,
Kampala, where he was charged with
murder.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
On 14 March, the Non-Governmental
Organisations Act (NGO Act) came into force.
Some of its provisions were vaguely worded
374
and could be used to clampdown on civil
society organizations. For example, it
restricted organizations from engaging in
activities that are “prejudicial to the security,
interests or dignity of the people of Uganda”,
without defining these terms.
Between April and May, offices of the
Forum for African Women Educationalists
(FAWE), the Human Rights Awareness and
Promotion Forum (HRAPF), and the Human
Rights Network for Journalists-Uganda
(HRNJ-Uganda) were broken into by
unidentified people and items stolen. At
FAWE, the intruders stole an internet server,
computers, cameras and projectors. At
HRNJ-Uganda, CCTV footage shows a visitor
giving security guards food apparently
containing sedatives, allowing four intruders
to search the premises as the guards slept.
The Inspector General of Police formed a
committee in July to investigate the break-
ins, but the affected organizations were
concerned that investigations were not
carried out. No one was arrested, charged or
prosecuted in connection with the break-ins. 3
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
On 4 August, police broke up an LGBTI
beauty pageant in Kampala, part of Uganda
Pride. They arrested 16 people – most of
them Ugandan LGBTI rights activists – who
were released after about an hour. A man
was seriously injured after he jumped from a
sixth-floor window fearing police abuse.
On 24 September, the police prevented
more than 100 people from joining a Pride
parade on a beach in Entebbe. They ordered
people back onto minibuses and told them to
leave the area. The participants tried to go to
another beach, but police prevented them
from holding the parade there too.
The HRAPF and the Civil Society Coalition
on Human Rights and Constitutional Law
(CSCHRCL), a coalition of 50 organizations,
filed a petition in the East African Court of
Justice, arguing that Uganda’s Anti-
Homosexuality Act was contrary to the rule of
law and the good governance principles of
the East African Community Treaty. On 27
Amnesty International Report 2016/17September, the Court refused to consider the
petition on the basis that the Anti-
Homosexuality Act had been declared null
and void by Uganda’s Constitutional Court in
August 2014.
CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
The pre-trial hearing of former Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) commander Colonel
Thomas Kwoyelo, charged with war crimes
and crimes against humanity in northern
Uganda, began on 15 August in the
International Crime Division of Uganda’s High
Court. The hearing was adjourned because
Thomas Kwoyelo’s lawyers were not notified
in time. The prosecution also introduced new
charges relating to sexual and gender-based
violence. In September, a court in Gulu,
northern Uganda, ruled that victims could
participate in the proceedings in line with
their right to participate before the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Thomas
Kwoyelo, who was captured by the Ugandan
army in 2008, remained in detention.
On 23 March, the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber
confirmed 70 charges against Dominic
Ongwen, a former LRA commander who had
been abducted as a child and forcibly
recruited into the LRA. The charges included
crimes against humanity and war crimes,
sexual and gender-based crimes, and
conscription and use of child soldiers in
northern Uganda.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
On 26 May, the High Court convicted seven
of 13 people charged in relation to the 2010
World Cup bombing in Kampala. The Somali-
based armed group al-Shabaab claimed
responsibility for the attack, which killed 76
people. The Court said the prosecution had
failed to link five of the defendants to the
bombing. The five were immediately
rearrested and charged with new offences of
creating documents and materials while in
Luzira Prison connected with “preparations to
facilitate, assist or engage co-conspirators to
undertake terrorist acts in Uganda”.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
1. Uganda: Violations against opposition party impeding its efforts to
contest election outcome (News story, 26 February)
2. Uganda: Denounce unlawful killings and ensure accountability in
aftermath of deadly clashes (News story, 28 November)
3. Uganda: Investigate break-ins at groups’ offices (News story, 13
June)
UKRAINE
Ukraine
Head of state: Petro Poroshenko
Head of government: Volodymyr Hroysman (replaced
Arseniy Yatsenyuk in April)
Sporadic low-scale fighting continued in
eastern Ukraine with both sides violating
the ceasefire agreement. Both the
Ukrainian and pro-Russian separatist forces
continued to enjoy impunity for violations of
international humanitarian law, including
war crimes, such as torture. Authorities in
Ukraine and the self-styled People’s
Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk
conducted unlawful detention of individuals
perceived to support the other side,
including for use in prisoner exchanges. The
long-awaited State Investigation Bureau,
intended to investigate violations by the
military and law enforcement officials, was
formally established but not operational by
the end of the year. Independent media and
activists were not allowed to work freely in
the People’s Republics of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Media perceived as pro-Russian
faced harassment in government-controlled
territories. The largest-ever Pride march for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) people in the capital, Kyiv,
was supported by the city authorities and
effectively protected by the police. In
Crimea, the de facto authorities continued
their campaign to eliminate pro-Ukrainian
dissent. It increasingly relied on Russian
anti-extremism and anti-terrorism
legislation and criminal prosecution of
dozens of people perceived to be disloyal.
375BACKGROUND TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Following a two-month political crisis, after
several reform-oriented politicians resigned
from top government positions alleging
widespread corruption, Parliament accepted
Arseniy Yatsenyuk’s resignation on 12 April.
He was replaced by Volodymyr Hroysman.
Sporadic fighting and exchange of fire
between government and Russia-backed
separatist forces continued. Gunfire, shelling
and unexploded ordnance continued to
cause civilian deaths and injuries. The UN
Human Rights Monitoring Mission estimated
that there were more than 9,700 conflict-
related deaths, of which around 2,000 were
civilians, and at least 22,500 conflict-related
injuries since the beginning of the conflict in
2014.
The International Criminal Court (ICC)
published its preliminary examination of
Ukraine on 14 November. It concluded that
the “situation within the territory of Crimea
and Sevastopol amounts to an international
armed conflict between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation” and that “information...
would suggest the existence of an
international armed conflict in the context of
armed hostilities in eastern Ukraine”. An
amendment to the Constitution was passed in
June, postponing the ratification of the Rome
Statute of the ICC for an “interim period” of
three years.
The Ukrainian authorities continued to
heavily restrict the movement of residents of
the separatist-controlled Donetsk and
Luhansk regions to government-controlled
territory.
The Russian authorities held parliamentary
elections in Crimea, which were not
internationally recognized.
The conflict-affected economy started to
grow slowly: GDP increased by 1%. Prices of
basic commodities and services such as
heating and water continued to rise, adding
to the declining living standards of the
majority of the population. Living standards in
the separatist-controlled areas continued to
deteriorate. Little progress was made in bringing to justice
law enforcement officials responsible for the
abusive use of force during EuroMaydan
protests in Kyiv in 2013-2014. The
investigation was marred by bureaucratic
hurdles. On 24 October, the Prosecutor
General reduced the staff and the powers of
the special department responsible for the
EuroMaydan abuses investigations, and
created a new unit to investigate only former
President Vyktor Yanukovych and his close
confidants.
The new State Investigation Bureau was
formally created in February to investigate
crimes committed by law enforcement
officials and the military, but the selection of
its head, on an open competition basis, was
not completed by the end of the year. 1
The UN Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture (SPT) suspended its visit to Ukraine
on 25 May after the Security Service of
Ukraine (SBU) denied it access to some of its
facilities in eastern Ukraine where secret
prisoners were reportedly held as well as
tortured and otherwise ill-treated. The SPT
resumed and completed its visit in
September and produced a report which the
Ukrainian authorities did not give their
consent to publish.
376
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCE
Lawyer Yuriy Grabovsky went missing on 6
March and was found murdered on 25
March. Before his disappearance, Yuriy
Grabovsky complained of intimidation and
harassment by the Ukrainian authorities in an
attempt to make him withdraw from the case
of one of two alleged Russian servicemen
who were captured in eastern Ukraine by
government forces. During a press
conference on 29 March, the Chief Military
Prosecutor of Ukraine announced that two
suspects had been detained in connection
with Yuriy Grabovsky’s murder. At the end of
the year, they remained in pre-trial detention
and the investigation was ongoing. 2
Amnesty International Report 2016/17ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Both the Ukrainian authorities and separatist
forces in eastern Ukraine engaged in
unlawful detentions in the territory under
their respective control. Civilians they
suspected of sympathizing with the other side
were used as currency for prisoner
exchanges. 3 Those unwanted by the other
side remained in detention, often
unacknowledged, for months with no legal
remedies nor prospect of release.
Kostyantyn Beskorovaynyi returned home
on 25 February after his abduction and
indirect official acknowledgement of his
secret arrest became the subject of
international campaigning. 4 In July, Ukraine’s
Chief Military Prosecutor promised an
effective investigation into his allegations of
enforced disappearance, torture and 15-
months’ secret detention by the SBU, but no
tangible outcomes of the investigation were
reported by the end of the year.
Dozens more individuals were held
secretly on SBU premises in Mariupol,
Pokrovsk, Kramatorsk, Izyum and Kharkiv,
and possibly elsewhere. Some were
eventually exchanged for prisoners held by
the separatists. Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch received the names of
16 individuals from three separate sources,
all independently confirming them as secret
prisoners held by the SBU in Kharkiv since
2014 or 2015, and shared the list with the
Ukrainian authorities. At least 18 people,
including the 16 independently confirmed
prisoners, were subsequently secretly
released; their detention was never officially
acknowledged. Of them, Vyktor Ashykhmyn,
Mykola Vakaruk and Dmytro Koroliov decided
to speak out and submit official complaints. 5
In the self-proclaimed People’s Republics
of Donetsk and Luhansk, local “Ministries of
State Security” used their powers under local
“decrees” to detain individuals arbitrarily for
up to 30 days and repeatedly extend this.
Igor Kozlovsky (arrested on 27 January), and
Volodymyr Fomychev (arrested on 4
January), were both accused of possessing
illegal weapons, which they denied, and of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
“supporting” the “Ukrainian side”. A court in
Donetsk sentenced Volodymyr Fomychev to
two years in jail on 16 August. Igor Kozlovsky
remained in pre-trial detention at the end of
the year.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
The CERD Committee highlighted a number
of concerns about difficulties faced by
internally displaced people (IDPs) in its 2016
review of Ukraine. These included the linking
of social benefits, including pensions, to the
status of IDPs and residence in government-
controlled areas.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
JOURNALISTS
Media outlets perceived as espousing pro-
Russian or pro-separatist views, and those
particularly critical of the authorities, faced
harassment including threats of closure or
physical violence. The TV channel Inter was
threatened with closure repeatedly by the
Interior Minister, and on 4 September around
15 masked men attempted forcefully but
unsuccessfully to enter Inter’s premises,
accusing it of pro-Russian news coverage.
They then threw petrol bombs into the
building, starting a fire.
Popular TV presenter Savik Shuster (who
holds Italian and Canadian nationality) had
his work permit annulled by the Ukrainian
Migration Service, in violation of the existing
procedure. The Kyiv Appeals Court reinstated
the permit on 12 July. Subsequently, criminal
proceedings were launched against Savik
Shuster’s TV channel 3STV by the tax
authorities. On 1 December, Savik Shuster
decided to close the channel due to the
pressure and lack of funds.
Ruslan Kotsaba, a freelance journalist and
blogger from Ivano-Frankivsk, was sentenced
to three-and-a-half years in jail on 12 May, for
“obstructing legitimate activities of the
Ukrainian Armed Forces in a special period”.
He had been arrested in 2015 after posting a
video on YouTube in which he demanded an
immediate end to fighting in Donbass and
called on Ukrainian men to resist
377conscription. He was fully acquitted on
appeal on 12 July and immediately released.
On 20 July, journalist Pavel Sheremet was
killed by a bomb planted in his car in the
capital Kyiv. No perpetrators had been
identified by the end of the year. The
investigation into the killing of journalist Oles
Buzina, shot dead by two masked gunmen in
2015, had likewise yielded no results.
Journalists with pro-Ukrainian views or
reporting for Ukrainian media outlets were
not able to operate openly in separatist-
controlled areas and Crimea. A Russian crew
from the independent Russian Dozhd TV
channel was arrested in Donetsk and
deported to Russia by the Ministry of State
Security after recording an interview with a
former separatist commander.
In Crimea, independent journalists were
unable to work openly. Journalists from
mainland Ukraine were denied access and
turned back at the de facto border. Local
journalists and bloggers critical of the
Russian occupation and illegal annexation of
Crimea risked prosecution, and few dared to
express their views. Mykola Semena, a
veteran journalist, was investigated under
“extremism” charges (facing up to seven
years’ imprisonment if convicted) and placed
under travel restrictions. He had published
an article online under a pseudonym in
which he supported the “blockade” of
Crimea by pro-Ukrainian activists as
a necessary measure for the peninsula to be
“returned back” to Ukraine. He was officially
designated as a “supporter of extremism”,
and his bank account was frozen. At the end
of the year, the investigation into his case was
ongoing.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
On 19 March, a court in Lviv, western
Ukraine, banned the holding of the LGBTI
Festival of Equality in the street due to public
safety concerns. The organizers moved the
event indoors, but on 20 March the venue
was attacked by a group of masked right-
wing activists. No injuries were reported but
378
the organizers were forced to cancel the
event.
An LGBTI Pride march, supported by the
Kyiv authorities and heavily protected by
police, was held in central Kyiv on 12 June.
With around 2,000 participants, it became
the largest-ever event of its kind in Ukraine. 6
CRIMEA
None of the enforced disappearances that
followed the Russian occupation were
effectively investigated. Ervin Ibragimov,
member of the World Congress of Crimean
Tatars, was forcibly disappeared near his
home in Bakhchisaray, central Crimea, on 24
May. Available video footage from a security
camera shows uniformed men forcing Ervin
Ibragimov into a minivan and driving him
away. An investigation was opened, but no
progress had been made at the end of the
year. 7
Freedoms of expression, association and
peaceful assembly, already heavily restricted,
were further reduced. Some of the
independent media that had been forced to
relocate to mainland Ukraine in earlier years
had access to their websites blocked by the
de facto authorities in Crimea. On 7 March,
the mayor of Crimean capital Simferopol
banned all public assemblies except those
organized by the authorities.
Ethnic Crimean Tatars continued to bear
the brunt of the de facto authorities’
campaign to eliminate all remaining vestiges
of pro-Ukrainian dissent. 8 The Mejlis of the
Crimean Tatar People, a body elected at an
informal assembly, Kurultai, to represent the
community, was suspended on 18 April and
banned by a court as “extremist” on 26 April.
Its banning was upheld by the Supreme
Court of the Russian Federation on 29
September. 9
The trial continued of the Mejlis’ deputy
leader, Ahtem Chiygoz, on trumped-up
charges of organizing “mass disturbances”
on 26 February 2014 in Simferopol (a
predominantly peaceful rally on the eve of the
Russian occupation, marked by some
clashes between pro-Russian and pro-
Ukrainian demonstrators). Held in a pre-trial
Amnesty International Report 2016/17detention centre in the vicinity of the court
building, he was only allowed to attend his
court hearings via a video link, purportedly
because of the “danger” he would pose.
Ahtem Chiygoz remained one of several
prisoners of conscience in Crimea. Ali Asanov
and Mustafa Degermendzhi also continued to
be held in pre-trial detention for allegedly
participating in the same “mass
disturbances” on 26 February 2014.
The Russian authorities used allegations of
possession of “extremist literature” and of
membership of the Islamist organization Hizb
ut-Tahrir as a pretext for house searches of
ethnic Crimean Tatars (predominantly
Muslims) and arrests. At least 19 men were
arrested as alleged members of Hizb ut-
Tahrir. Of them, four men from Sevastopol
were put on trial in a military court in Russia,
in violation of international humanitarian law
governing occupied territories, and
sentenced to between five and seven years in
prison. During the trial, nearly all prosecution
witnesses tried to retract their earlier
statements, claiming that these had been
forcibly extracted under threat of criminal
prosecution by members of the Russian
security service.
1. Ukraine: Two years after Euromaydan – The prospect for justice is
threatened (EUR 50/3516/2016)
2. Ukraine: Further information – Body of missing lawyer has been
found (EUR 50/3734/2016)
3. “You don't exist”: Arbitrary detentions, enforced disappearances, and
torture in eastern Ukraine (EUR 50/4455/2016)
4. Ukraine: Authorities must disclose missing man’s fate: Kostyantyn
Beskorovaynyi (EUR 50/3275/2016)
5. Five men in secret detention in Ukraine (EUR 50/4728/2016)
6. Ukraine: Kyiv Pride – A genuine celebration of human rights (EUR
50/4258/2016)
7. Ukraine: Crimean Tatar activist forcibly disappeared – Ervin
Ibragimov (EUR 50/4121/2016)
8. Ukraine: Crimea in the Dark – The silencing of dissent (EUR
50/5330/2016)
9. Ukraine: Crimea – Proposed closure of the Mejlis marks culmination
of repressive measures against the Crimean Tatar community (EUR
50/3655/2016)
UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES
United Arab Emirates
Head of state: Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan
Head of government: Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashed Al
Maktoum
The authorities continued to arbitrarily
restrict the rights to freedom of expression
and association, detaining and prosecuting
government critics, opponents and foreign
nationals under criminal defamation and
anti-terrorism laws. Enforced
disappearances, unfair trials and torture
and other ill-treatment of detainees
remained common. Scores of people
sentenced after unfair trials in previous
years remained in prison; they included
prisoners of conscience. Women continued
to be discriminated against in law and in
practice. Migrant workers faced exploitation
and abuse. The courts continued to impose
death sentences; no executions were
reported.
BACKGROUND
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) remained
part of the Saudi Arabia-led international
coalition engaged in armed conflict in Yemen
(see Yemen entry) and participated in
international military action in Syria and Iraq
against the armed group Islamic State (IS).
In August, the authorities agreed to the
transfer of 15 detainees from the US
detention centre at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba,
to the UAE.
The government failed to respond to
requests to visit the UAE made by the Special
Rapporteur on torture and other UN human
rights experts.
FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSOCIATION
The authorities tightened the law relating to
electronic information and restricted online
expression and association, enacting
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
379legislation to ban the use of virtual private
networks. They also arrested and prosecuted
peaceful critics and others, including foreign
nationals, under criminal defamation
provisions of the Penal Code, the 2012
cybercrime law and the 2014 anti-terrorism
law in unfair trials before the State Security
Chamber (SSC) of the Federal Supreme
Court. The SSC’s proceedings fell far short of
international fair trial standards.
In May, the SSC acquitted Moza ‘Abdouli
of “insulting” UAE leaders and political
institutions and “spreading false
information”. She had been arrested in
November 2015 together with her sister,
Amina ‘Abdouli, and brother, Mos’ab
‘Abdouli. Another brother, Waleed ‘Abdouli,
arrested in November 2015 for criticizing his
siblings’ detention at Friday prayers, was
released without charge in March.
Tayseer al-Najjar, a Jordanian journalist
arrested in December 2015, remained in
detention at the end of the year awaiting trial
before the SSC, apparently in connection with
Facebook posts criticizing the UAE and
alleged links to Egypt’s banned Muslim
Brotherhood organization. In October, he told
his wife that his eyesight was deteriorating in
detention.
In August, the government appeared to be
behind an attempt to remotely hack into the
iPhone of human rights defender Ahmed
Mansoor. If successful, it would have allowed
remote access to all information on the
phone, and remote control of his phone’s
applications, microphone and camera. The
sophisticated spyware used to carry out this
operation is sold by NSO Group, an Israel-
based, US-owned company which claimed to
sell their product exclusively to governments.
Human rights defender and prisoner of
conscience Dr Mohammed al-Roken
remained in prison, serving a 10-year
sentence imposed after the unfair “UAE 94”
mass trial in 2013.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The authorities subjected scores of
detainees, including foreign nationals, to
enforced disappearance, holding them for
380
months in secret and unacknowledged
detention for interrogation. Upon release,
many reported that they had been tortured
and otherwise ill-treated.
‘Abdulrahman Bin Sobeih was subjected
to enforced disappearance for three months
by UAE authorities after he was forcibly
returned to the UAE by Indonesia in
December 2015. He had been sentenced in
his absence in 2013 to a 15-year prison term
after the unfair UAE 94 trial. Following a
retrial, in November he was sentenced to 10
years’ imprisonment, followed by three years’
surveillance.
Prisoner of conscience Dr Nasser Bin
Ghaith, an academic and economist arrested
in August 2015, was subjected to enforced
disappearance until April when he was
brought before the SSC. He faced charges
relating solely to the peaceful exercise of his
rights to freedom of expression and
association. He told the court that officials
had tortured and otherwise ill-treated him,
but the judge failed to order an investigation.
In December his case was transferred to an
appeal court.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees,
particularly those subjected to enforced
disappearance, remained common and were
committed with impunity. Neither the
government nor the SSC conducted
independent investigations into detainees’
allegations of torture.
Between March and June the authorities
released six of at least 12 men of Libyan
origin whom they had arrested in 2014 and
2015. They were released after the SSC
acquitted them of providing support for
Libyan armed groups. During 2015, State
Security officials had subjected at least 10 of
the men to months of incommunicado
detention and torture, including beatings,
electric shocks and sleep deprivation, before
they were brought to trial. The fate of two of
the men remained undisclosed, while those
freed in 2016 included Salim al-Aradi, a
Canadian-Libyan national, and Kamal Eldarat
Amnesty International Report 2016/17and his son, Mohammed Eldarat, both US-
Libyan nationals.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Scores of people, including foreign nationals,
were prosecuted before the SSC, often on
vaguely worded charges relating to national
security. The SSC denied defendants the
right to an effective defence and accepted
evidence obtained under torture to convict
defendants. In December, the government
enacted legislation providing for an appeal in
state security cases.
In March, the SSC convicted 34 men on
charges that included establishing Shabab al-
Manara (Minaret Youth Group) to overthrow
the government and create an “IS-style
caliphate”. They received prison sentences
ranging from three years to life. Authorities
detained them in 2013 and subjected them
to enforced disappearance for 20 months.
Some appeared to have been convicted
based on “confessions” they said were
extracted through torture.
In June, the SSC sentenced Egyptian
national Mosaab Ahmed ‘Abdel-‘Aziz
Ramadan to three years’ imprisonment for
running an “international group in the UAE
affiliated to the Egyptian Muslim
Brotherhood”. Before trial, the authorities
subjected him to several months of enforced
disappearance during which he alleged that
security officials forced him to “confess”
under torture.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women remained subject to discrimination in
law and in practice, notably in matters of
marriage and divorce, inheritance and child
custody. They were inadequately protected
against sexual violence and violence within
the family.
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers, who comprise around 90%
of the private workforce, continued to face
exploitation and abuse. They remained tied to
employers under the kafala sponsorship
system and were denied collective bargaining
rights. Trade unions remained banned and
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
migrant workers who engaged in strike action
faced deportation and a one-year ban on
returning to the UAE.
In January, Ministerial Decrees 764, 765
and 767 of 2015 came into effect, which the
government said would address some abuses
against migrant workers, including the
longstanding practice of contract substitution
whereby employers require migrant workers
to sign new contracts with reduced wages
when they arrive in the UAE.
The decrees did not apply to domestic
workers, mostly women from Asia and Africa,
who remained explicitly excluded from labour
law protections and particularly vulnerable to
exploitation and serious abuses, including
forced labour and human trafficking.
DEATH PENALTY
Courts handed down death sentences; no
executions were reported. Law 7/2016,
relating to data protection and expression,
expanded the applicability of the death
penalty.
UNITED KINGDOM
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II
Head of government: Theresa May (replaced David
Cameron in July)
Full accountability for torture allegations
against UK intelligence agencies and armed
forces remained unrealized. An extremely
broad surveillance law was passed. Women
in Northern Ireland faced significant
restrictions on access to abortion. The
government failed to establish a review into
the impacts of cuts to civil legal aid. Hate
crimes rose significantly following the UK’s
referendum vote to leave the EU.
LEGAL, CONSTITUTIONAL OR
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
In June, the majority of the electorate in the
UK and Gibraltar voted in a referendum to
leave the EU.
381Although the new Justice Secretary
announced in August that the government
intended to continue with plans to replace
the Human Rights Act (which incorporates
the European Convention on Human Rights
into domestic law) with a British Bill of
Rights, by the end of the year the Attorney
General suggested that concrete proposals
would be deferred until after the EU
referendum process had been completed. The Independent Reviewer’s annual
report, published in November, documented
that new powers to prevent suspected
“foreign terrorist fighters” from travelling were
applied 24 times during 2015, and pre-
existing powers to withdraw passports from
British citizens were exercised 23 times, but
that a power available since 2015 to
temporarily exclude returning “foreign
terrorist fighters” had not been used.
JUSTICE SYSTEM “Counter-extremism” policy
Calls intensified for a review of cuts to civil
legal aid brought about by the Legal Aid,
Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act
2012 (LASPO), based on their impact on
vulnerable and marginalized people in
various contexts, including inquests,
immigration, welfare, family and housing
law. 1 Official statistics published in June by
the Legal Aid Agency showed that legal help
in civil cases had dropped to one third of pre-
LASPO levels. In July, the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights called
on the government to reassess the impact of
reforms to the legal aid system. The
government failed to establish a review. Plans for a Counter-Extremism and
Safeguarding Bill were announced in May,
but no concrete legislative proposal had been
tabled by end of year.
NGO research into the statutory “prevent
duty” on certain public bodies, including
schools, to “have due regard to the need to
prevent people from being drawn into
terrorism”, found that the scheme created a
serious risk of violating human rights,
including peaceful exercise of freedom of
expression, and that its application in
educational and health care settings
undermined trust.
In April, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association warned that the government’s
approach to “non-violent extremism” risked
violating both freedoms. In July, the
Parliamentary Joint Committee for Human
Rights recommended the use of existing laws
rather than drafting new, unclear legislation.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Counter-terrorism powers and related policy
initiatives to counter “extremism” continued
to raise concerns.
Definition of terrorism
Despite a Court of Appeal judgment in
January which narrowed the definition of
terrorism, and recurring criticism of the over-
broad statutory definition by the Independent
Reviewer of Terrorism Legislation, the Home
Secretary confirmed, in October, that the
government had no intention of changing it.
Administrative controls
In November, Parliament extended the
Terrorism Prevention and Investigation
Measures (TPIM) Act 2011 for five more
years. TPIMs are government-imposed
administrative restrictions on individuals
suspected of involvement in terrorism-related
activity.
382
Drones
In May, the Joint Committee for Human
Rights published its inquiry into the use of
drones for targeted killing. The inquiry
examined the drone strike by the Royal Air
Force in 2015 in al-Raqqa, Syria, killing three
people, including at least one British national,
believed to be members of the armed group
Islamic State (IS). The inquiry called on the
government to clarify its policy of targeted
killings in armed conflict and its role in
targeted killing by other states outside armed
conflict.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT SURVEILLANCE
Internment in Northern Ireland In November, the Investigatory Powers Act
(IPA), which overhauled the existing,
piecemeal domestic legislation on
surveillance, became law. The IPA granted
increased powers to public authorities to
interfere with private communication and
information in the UK and abroad. It
permitted a broad range of vaguely defined
interception, interference and data retention
practices, and imposed new requirements on
private companies, facilitating government
surveillance by creating “internet connection
records”. The new law lacked a requirement
for clear prior judicial authorization.
In October, the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal (IPT) ruled that the secret, bulk
collection of domestic and foreign
communications data and the collection of
“bulk personal datasets” had violated the
right to privacy previously, but were now
lawful.
Proceedings were pending before the
ECtHR regarding the legality of the pre-IPA
mass surveillance regime and intelligence
sharing practices. The Court of Justice of the
EU ruled in December that the general,
indiscriminate retention of communications
data under the Data Retention and
Investigatory Powers Act 2014 was not
permitted.
In December, the government responded to
questions put to it by the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR), following a 2014
request by the Irish government to review the
1978 judgment in Ireland v UK, on torture
techniques used in internment in Northern
Ireland in 1971-72.
Rendition
In June, the Crown Prosecution Service
(CPS) decided not to bring any criminal
charges relating to allegations by two Libyan
families that they had been subject to
rendition, torture and other ill-treatment in
2004 by the US and Libyan governments,
with the knowledge and co-operation of UK
officials. In November, the two families –
Abdul-Hakim Belhaj and Fatima Boudchar,
and Sami al-Saadi and his wife and children
– began judicial review proceedings to
challenge the CPS decision.
Armed forces
In September, it emerged that the Royal
Military Police were investigating
approximately 600 cases of alleged
mistreatment and abuse in detention in
Afghanistan between 2005 and 2013.
As of November, the Iraq Historic
Allegations Team, the body investigating
allegations of abuse of Iraqi civilians by UK
armed forces personnel, had concluded or
was about to conclude investigations into
2,356 of 3,389 allegations received.
The Iraq Fatality Investigations, a separate
body established in 2013, reported in
September on the death of 15-year-old
Ahmad Jabbar Kareem Ali, finding that he
drowned after being forced into the Shatt-al-
Basra canal in southern Iraq in 2003 by UK
soldiers. The Ministry of Defence apologized
for the incident.
Allegations of war crimes committed by UK
armed forces in Iraq between 2003 and 2008
remained under preliminary examination by
the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
NORTHERN IRELAND: LEGACY ISSUES
The former and current Secretaries of State
for Northern Ireland both referred to those
raising allegations of collusion or focusing on
human rights violations by state agents as
contributing to a “pernicious counter
narrative”. NGOs advocating for
accountability for victims raised concerns
that such language placed their work as
human rights defenders at risk.
In November, the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and
guarantees of non-recurrence urged the UK
government to address structural or systemic
patterns of violations and abuses, rather than
focusing solely on existing “event-based”
approaches. He suggested widening the
383focus of measures from cases of death to
include torture, sexual abuse and unlawful
detention, with a gender-sensitive approach.
The Special Rapporteur also urged limiting
national security arguments against claims
for redress, and ensuring that reparations for
all victims be tackled seriously and
systematically.
The Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland
set out a detailed five-year plan to address
the backlog of “legacy” coroner’s inquests,
but failed to receive funding from the
Northern Ireland Executive and central
government.
The government continued to refuse to
establish an independent public inquiry into
the 1989 killing of Patrick Finucane, despite
having acknowledged previously that there
had been “collusion” in the case.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to abortion in Northern Ireland
remained limited to exceptional cases where
the life or health of the woman or girl was at
risk. 2 The abortion law in Northern Ireland
was criticized by both the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child in July.
Women in Northern Ireland faced criminal
prosecution for taking WHO-approved
medication to induce abortions. A woman
was given a three-month suspended
sentence after pleading guilty to two offences
under the 1861 law governing abortion in
Northern Ireland.
Official statistics for the previous year
showed that 833 women from Northern
Ireland had travelled to England or Wales to
access abortion, and that 16 lawful abortions
had been performed in Northern Ireland.
In June, the Northern Ireland Court of
Appeal heard appeals of a 2015 High Court,
ruling that the region’s abortion law was
incompatible with domestic and international
human rights law.
In November, Scotland’s First Minister set
out proposals to provide access to abortion
services through the National Health Service
in Scotland for women and girls from
Northern Ireland.
384
DISCRIMINATION
The National Police Chiefs’ Council’s official
statistics in June and September showed a
57% spike in reporting of hate crime in the
week immediately following the EU
membership referendum, followed by a
decrease in reporting to a level 14% higher
than the same period the previous year. The
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
expressed his concern in June. Government
statistics published in October showed an
increase in hate crimes of 19% over the
previous year, with 79% of the incidents
recorded classified as “race hate crimes”. In
November, the CERD Committee called on
the UK to take steps to address the increase
in such hate crimes.
In the first inquiry of its kind, the UN
Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities reported on the cumulative
impact of legislative changes on welfare, care
and legal assistance. The government
disagreed with the Committee’s findings of
“grave or systematic violations of the rights of
persons with disabilities.”
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Immigration Act became law in May. It
extended sanctions against landlords whose
tenants’ immigration status disqualifies them
from renting, while increasing landlords’
eviction powers; extended powers to block
limited appeal rights against removal from the
UK until after the person has left the country;
and introduced a scheme whereby separated
children seeking asylum in the UK may be
transferred between local authorities.
The government continued to resist calls to
take more responsibility for hosting refugees.
In April, the government announced it would
resettle up to 3,000 people from the Middle
East and North Africa by May 2020. In
October, the government accepted a few
dozen separated children from the “Jungle”
camp in Calais, France, alongside a larger
number of other children relocated to join
family under provisions of the Dublin III
regulations.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17In January, an Independent Review into
the welfare in detention of vulnerable persons
made strong criticisms of the scale and
longevity of immigration detention. In August,
the Home Office responded with a new
“adults at risk” policy. However, NGOs
criticized the policy for further removing
safeguards against harmful detention,
including by adopting a narrow definition of
“torture” when considering the risk posed by
detention to a person’s welfare. In November,
the High Court permitted a challenge to the
policy, ordering that the previous wider
definition of torture be used for the time
being.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In December, the House of Commons voted
to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence (Istanbul
Convention), which the government had
signed in 2012. In July, the UN Committee
on the Rights of the Child recommended
improved collection of information on
violence against children, including domestic
and gender-based violence.
Serious concerns remained about the
reduced funding of specialist services for
women who had experienced domestic
violence or abuse. Research by the domestic
women’s rights organization Women’s Aid
showed that refuges were being forced to
turn away two in three survivors due to lack
of space or inability to meet their needs, and
that the rate for ethnic minority women was
four in five.
TRADE UNION RIGHTS
In May, the Trade Union Act, which placed
more restrictions on unions organizing strike
action, came into force. During the year, the
UN Special Rapporteur on the rights to
freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association and the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights called
on the government to review and revise
the law.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
1. United Kingdom: Cuts that hurt – the impact of legal aid cuts in
England on access to justice (EUR 45/4936/2016)
2. United Kingdom: Submission to the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (EUR 45/3990/2016)
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
United States of America
Head of state and government: Barack Obama
Two years after a Senate committee
reported on abuses in the secret detention
programme operated by the CIA, there was
still no accountability for crimes under
international law committed under﻿ it. More
detainees were transferred out of the US
detention centre at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba,
but others remained in indefinite detention
there, while pre-trial military commission
proceedings continued in a handful of
cases. Concern about the treatment of
refugees and migrants, the use of isolation
in state and federal prisons and the use of
force in policing continued. There were 20
executions during the year. In November,
Donald Trump was elected as President; his
inauguration was scheduled for 20 January
2017.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
In August, the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed concern that the investigation into
torture in the counter-terrorism context,
which the USA was legally obliged to
conduct, had not taken place. The
Committee noted that the USA had provided
no further information on the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) report into
the secret detention programme operated by
the CIA after the attacks of 11 September
2001 (9/11). The full 6,963-page report
remained classified top secret and the SSCI
had not released it by the end of the year.
On 16 August, the Committee noted that
the USA had provided no further information
on reports that Guantánamo Bay detainees
385had been denied access to judicial remedy
for torture and other human rights violations
incurred while in US custody. it was committed, could not be shielded from
judicial review.
IMPUNITY At the end of the year, nearly eight years after
President Obama made the commitment to
close the Guantánamo Bay detention facility
by January 2010, 59 men were still held
there, the majority of them without charge or
trial. During 2016, 48 detainees were
transferred to government authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cape Verde,
Ghana, Italy, Kuwait, Mauritania,
Montenegro, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia and the United Arab Emirates.
In August, the UN Committee against
Torture said that its recommendation to end
indefinite detention without charge or trial,
which amounted per se to a violation of the
UN Convention against Torture, had not been
implemented.
Pre-trial military commission proceedings
continued against five detainees accused of
involvement in the 9/11 attacks and charged
in 2012 for capital trial under the MCA of
2009. The five – Khalid Sheikh Mohammed,
Walid bin Attash, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, Ammar
al Baluchi and Mustafa al Hawsawi – were
held incommunicado in secret US custody
for up to four years prior to their transfer to
Guantánamo Bay in 2006. Their trial had not
begun by the end of 2016.
Pre-trial military commission proceedings
also continued against ‘Abd al-Rahim al-
Nashiri. He was arraigned for capital trial in
2011 on charges relating to the attempted
bombing of the USS The Sullivans in 2000,
and the bombings of the USS Cole in 2000
and of the French supertanker Limburg in
2002, all in Yemen. He had been held in
secret CIA custody for nearly four years prior
to his transfer to Guantánamo Bay in 2006.
In August 2016, the DC Circuit Court of
Appeals ruled that a decision on his claim,
that the offences with which he had been
charged were not triable by military
commission because they were not
committed in the context of and associated
with hostilities, had to await a final appeal in
No action was taken to end impunity for the
systematic human rights violations, including
torture and enforced disappearance,
committed in the secret CIA detention
programme after 9/11.
In May, the US Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia (DC) Circuit ruled that
the SSCI report into the secret CIA detention
programme remained a “congressional
record” and was not subject to disclosure
under the Freedom of Information Act. A
petition seeking US Supreme Court review of
the ruling was filed in November. Separately,
in late December, a DC District Court judge
ordered the administration to preserve the
SSCI report, and to deposit an electronic or
paper copy of it with the Court for secure
storage. At the end of the year, it was not
known if the government would appeal the
order.
On 12 August, the DC Circuit Court of
Appeals dismissed a lawsuit for damages
brought on behalf of Afghan national
Mohamed Jawad who had been held in US
military custody from 2002 to 2009. During
that time he was subjected to torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. He
was under 18 years old when taken into US
custody in Afghanistan and transferred to
detention in Guantánamo Bay. 1 The Court of
Appeals upheld a lower court decision to
dismiss the lawsuit on the grounds that the
federal courts lacked jurisdiction under
Section 7 of the Military Commission Act
(MCA) of 2006. 2
In October, the US Court of Appeals for the
Fourth Circuit overturned a lower court’s
dismissal of a lawsuit brought by Iraqi
nationals who claimed they were tortured by
interrogators employed by CACI Premier
Technology, Inc. at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq
in 2003 and 2004. The Court held that
intentional conduct by contracted
interrogators, which was unlawful at the time
386
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
Amnesty International Report 2016/17the case in what was still likely a decade
away.
Omar Khadr who pleaded guilty in 2010 to
charges under the MCA relating to conduct in
2002 in Afghanistan when he was aged 15,
and was transferred to his native Canada in
2012, sought disqualification of one of the
judges on the Court of Military Commission
Review (CMCR) on grounds of lack of
impartiality. The DC Circuit Court of Appeals
rejected the challenge, again ruling that the
claim would have to wait for a final appeal to
be decided.
During the year, Omar Khadr’s appeal to
the CMCR against his conviction, including
on grounds that he had pleaded guilty to
offences that were not war crimes triable by
military commission, was held in abeyance
pending the Court of Appeals’ decision on the
case of Guantánamo Bay detainee Ali Hamza
Suliman al Bahlul who is serving a life
sentence imposed in 2008 under the MCA of
2006. In 2015, a three-judge panel of the
Court had overturned Ali Hamza Suliman al
Bahlul’s conviction for conspiracy to commit
war crimes on the grounds that the charge
was not recognized under international law
and could not be tried by a military tribunal.
The government successfully sought
reconsideration by the full court, which in
October 2016 upheld the conspiracy
conviction in a fractured vote involving five
separate opinions and no resolution of the
ultimate issue. Three of the nine judges
dissented, arguing that Congress did not
have the power to make conspiracy an
offence triable by military commission,
stressing that “whatever deference the
judiciary may owe to the political branches in
matters of national security and defense, it is
not absolute”. Two judges wrote separately to
say that it was improper to decide the
ultimate issue for procedural reasons unique
to Ali Hamza Suliman al Bahlul’s case.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The authorities continued to fail to track the
exact number of people killed by law
enforcement officials during the year –
documentation by media outlets put the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
numbers at nearly 1,000 individuals killed.
The US Department of Justice (DOJ)
announced plans to create a system to track
these deaths under the Deaths in Custody
Reporting Act, to be implemented in 2017.
However, the programme is not compulsory
for law enforcement agencies and the data
compiled may not reflect the total numbers.
According to the limited data that is available,
black men are disproportionately victims of
police killings.
At least 21 people across 17 states died
after police used electric-shock weapons on
them, bringing the total number of such
deaths since 2001 to at least 700. Most of
the victims were not armed and did not
appear to pose a threat of death or serious
injury when the electric-shock weapon
was deployed.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In July, the deaths of Philando Castile in
Falcon Heights, Minnesota, and Alton
Sterling in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, sparked
protests against the police across the country.
Similar protests against police use of force
occurred in other cities such as Tulsa in
Oklahoma and Charlotte in North Carolina.
The use of heavy-duty riot gear and military-
grade weapons and equipment to police
these demonstrations raised several concerns
in terms of the demonstrators’ right to
peaceful assembly.
Protests in and around Standing Rock,
North Dakota, against the Dakota Access
Pipeline to transport crude oil, despite being
largely peaceful, drew a heavy police
response from local and state law
enforcement authorities. Local law
enforcement agencies placed a police
barricade on the road leading to the protest
sites. Officers responded in riot gear and with
assault weapons and used pepper spray,
rubber bullets and electric-shock weapons
against protesters. There were more than 400
arrests after August, mainly for acts of
trespassing and non-violent resistance.
Authorities targeted reporters and activists for
low- level offences such as trespassing.
387GUN VIOLENCE
Attempts by US Congress to pass legislation
to prevent the sale of assault weapons or
implement comprehensive background
checks for weapon buyers, failed to pass.
Congress continued to deny funding to the
Center for Disease Control and Prevention to
conduct or sponsor research into the causes
of gun violence and ways to prevent it.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
More than 42,000 unaccompanied children
and 56,000 individuals who comprised family
units were apprehended crossing the
southern border irregularly during the year.
Families were detained for months, some for
more than a year, while pursuing claims to
remain in the USA. Many were held in
facilities without proper access to medical
care and legal counsel. The UN High
Commissioner for Refugees called the
situation in the Northern Triangle a
humanitarian and protection crisis.
The authorities resettled more than 12,000
Syrian refugees by the end of the year and
said they would go from taking in 70,000
refugees per year to accepting 85,000 in
fiscal year 2016 and 100,000 in the year
2017. Legislators introduced bills attempting
to prevent lawfully admitted refugees from
living in their state. In September, Texas
announced its withdrawal from the federal
Refugee Resettlement Program on the basis
of alleged security concerns, despite refugees
being required to undergo an exhaustive
screening process before entering the USA.
Kansas and New Jersey also withdrew from
the Program.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Native American and Alaskan Native women
remained more than 2.5 times more likely to
be raped or sexually assaulted than non-
Indigenous women. Gross inequalities
remained for Indigenous women in accessing
post-rape care, including access to
examinations, rape kits – a package of items
used by medical staff to gather forensic
388
evidence – and other essential health care
services.
Disparities in women’s access to sexual
and reproductive health care, including
maternal care, continued. The maternal
mortality ratio rose over the last six years;
African-American women remained nearly
four times more likely to die of pregnancy-
related complications than white women.
The threat of criminal punishment for drug
use during pregnancy continued to deter
women from marginalized groups from
accessing health care, including prenatal
care. However, a harmful amendment to
Tennessee’s “fetal assault” law expired in July
after successful advocacy ensured the law
did not become permanent. 3
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Legal discrimination against LGBTI people
persisted at the state and federal level. No
federal protections existed banning
discrimination on the grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity in the
workplace, housing or health care. While
some individual states and cities enacted
non-discrimination laws that included
protection on the grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity, the vast
majority of states provided no legal
protections for LGBTI people. Conversion
therapy, criticized by the UN Committee
against Torture as a form of torture, remained
legal in most states and territories.
Transgender people continued to be
particularly marginalized. Murder rates of
transgender women were high and
discriminatory state laws, such as North
Carolina’s “bathroom bill” which bans cities
from allowing transgender individuals to use
public bathrooms in accordance with their
gender identity, undermined their rights.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Over 80,000 prisoners at any given time were
held in conditions of physical and social
deprivation in federal and state prisons
throughout the country. In January, the DOJ
issued guiding principles and policy
Amnesty International Report 2016/17recommendations that would limit the use of
solitary confinement and restrictive housing –
prison or jail housing that had different rules
than were in place for the general prison
population – in federal prisons. The
recommendations emphasized housing
prisoners in the least restrictive environment
possible, diverting persons with mental illness
out of isolation, and drastically limiting the
use of solitary confinement for juveniles.
DEATH PENALTY
Twenty men were executed in five states,
bringing to 1,442 the total number of
executions since the US Supreme Court
approved new capital laws in 1976. This was
the lowest annual total since 1991.
Approximately 30 new death sentences were
passed. Around 2,900 people remained on
death row at the end of the year.
Texas carried out fewer than 10 executions
for the first time since 1996. Oklahoma did
not carry out any executions for the first time
since 1994. Texas and Oklahoma combined
accounted for 45% of executions in the USA
between 1976 and 2016.
In the November elections, the Oklahoma
electorate voted to amend the state
constitution to prohibit Oklahoma’s state
courts from declaring the death penalty a
“cruel or unusual” punishment. In California,
the state with the largest death row
population, voters opted not to repeal the
death penalty; and in Nebraska the electorate
voted to reject the legislature’s 2015 repeal of
the death penalty.
Execution moratoriums remained in force
in Pennsylvania, Washington State and
Oregon throughout the year.
Florida, where executions had been on the
increase in recent years, saw them on hold
all year after the US Supreme Court ruled in
Hurst v Florida in January that Florida’s
capital sentencing statute was
unconstitutional for giving juries only an
advisory role in who was sentenced to death.
Florida legislature passed a new statute, but
in October the Florida Supreme Court ruled it
unconstitutional because it did not require
juror unanimity on death sentencing. In
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
December, the Florida Supreme Court ruled
that the Hurst ruling applied to those death
row inmates – just over 200 of nearly 400 –
whose death sentences had not yet been
finalized on mandatory appeal by 2002. They
could be entitled to new sentencing hearings
as a result.
In August, the Delaware Supreme Court
struck down Delaware’s capital sentencing
statute in the wake of Hurst v Florida,
because it gave judges the ultimate power
to decide whether the prosecution
had proved all facts necessary to impose the
death penalty. Delaware’s Attorney General
announced that he would not appeal the
ruling.
States continued to face difficulties with
their lethal injection protocols and the
acquisition of drugs. Louisiana will not carry
out any executions throughout 2017 due to
the litigation in federal court on its lethal
injection protocol. Ohio continued to face
problems sourcing lethal injection drugs and
there were no executions for the second year
running in Ohio. In March, Ohio Supreme
Court ruled 4-3 that the state could try to
execute Romell Broom for the second time.
The first attempt in 2009 was abandoned
after the lethal injection team failed to
establish an intravenous line during two
hours of trying. An execution date for Romell
Broom had not been set by the end of the
year.
The US Supreme Court intervened in a
number of capital cases. In March, it granted
Louisiana death row inmate Michael Wearry a
new trial, 14 years after he was convicted.
The Court found that prosecutorial
misconduct, including the withholding of
exculpatory evidence, had violated Michael
Wearry’s right to a fair trial. In May, it granted
Georgia death row inmate Timothy Foster a
new trial because of racial discrimination at
jury selection. Timothy Foster, an African-
American, was sentenced to death by an all-
white jury after prosecutors had peremptorily
removed every black prospective juror from
the jury pool.
In August, the National Hispanic Caucus
of State Legislators “overwhelmingly”
389approved a resolution calling for abolition of
the death penalty across the USA. The
resolution cited racial discrimination,
ineffectiveness, cost and the risk of error.
In April, Gary Tyler was released after 42
years in prison in Louisiana. Gary Tyler, an
African-American, had originally been
sentenced to death for the fatal shooting of a
13-year-old white boy in 1974 during a riot
over school integration. Gary Tyler, aged 16 at
the time of the shooting, was convicted and
sentenced to death by an all-white jury. His
death sentence was overturned after the US
Supreme Court ruled Louisiana’s mandatory
death penalty statute unconstitutional in
1976; and his life sentence was overturned
after the Court in 2012 barred mandatory life
without parole sentences for crimes
committed by under-18-year-olds. The
prosecution agreed to vacate the murder
conviction, allowed him to plead guilty to
manslaughter, and he received the maximum
prison sentence of 21 years, less than half
the time he had already served. 4
Conference. The exercise of conscientious
objection among medical practitioners
continued to pose significant barriers to
women’s access to safe and legal abortion.
BACKGROUND
2. USA: Chronicle of immunity foretold (AMR 51/003/2013) The Action Plan 2016-2019 “for a life free of
gender violence”, drafted by the National
Advisory Council against Domestic Violence,
came into effect.
In July, the UN CEDAW Committee urged
Uruguay to increase action to reduce
discrimination against Afro-descendant
women and to improve their access to
education, employment and health. The
Committee also expressed concern about the
lack of a specific mechanism to ensure
reparations for women who had suffered
sexual violence under the civil-military
government, among other issues.
In August, the UN Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities called for
the creation of consultation mechanisms for
people with disabilities to enable them to
participate in the adoption of public and
legislative policies and to ensure accessible
methods for reporting discrimination on
grounds of disability.
3. USA: Tennessee "Fetal Assault" Law − a threat to women’s health
and human rights (AMR 51/3623/2016) PRISON CONDITIONS
1. USA: From ill-treatment to unfair trial − the case of Mohamed Jawad,
chil﻿ d "enemy combatant" (AMR 51/091/2008)
4. USA: The Case of Gary Tyler, Louisiana (AMR 51/089/1994);
Louisiana: Unfair Trial – Gary Tyler (AMR 51/182/2007)
URUGUAY
Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Head of state and government: Tabaré Vázquez
Despite efforts by the Working Group for
Truth and Justice, little progress was made
in the few criminal prosecutions of crimes
under international law and human rights
violations committed during the period of
civil-military government (1973-1985).
Discrimination against people with
disabilities persisted and lack of gender
equality remained a concern. Uruguay
hosted the Global LGBTI Human Rights
390
In June, the Parliamentary Commissioner for
the Penitentiary System, with the support of
other national institutions and the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, facilitated
workshops on human rights education for
prison directors. These workshops aimed to
improve public servants’ understanding of
human rights-based approaches in order to
avoid internal conflicts and the excessive use
of force.
IMPUNITY
The Truth and Justice Working Group,
established in May 2015 to investigate crimes
against humanity committed between 1968
and 1985, continued to collect testimonies,
conduct exhumations, and locate the
remains of missing persons. It also gained
access to important documentation,
including archives at the headquarters of
Amnesty International Report 2016/17Naval Fusiliers and was due to make its
findings public in 2017.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In July, Uruguay hosted the Global LGBTI
Human Rights Conference. Uruguay chaired
the thematic group discussion calling for
LGBTI people to be included in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
For the first time Uruguay carried out a
census of transgender people to better
understand their situation. The multiple
discrimination suffered by transgender
people remained a problem, despite efforts
and policies to improve the situation.
Homophobia-free health centres were
successfully developed; however, the lack of
comprehensive health care for LGBTI people
remained a challenge.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The UN CEDAW Committee commended
Uruguay for a drastic reduction in maternal
mortality and the expansion of women’s
access to sexual and reproductive health
services. However, it expressed concern that
such access remained limited in rural areas.
The Committee expressed further concern at
the widespread use of conscientious
objection among medical practitioners, which
limited women’s access to safe and legal
abortion services. The Committee called on
the government to assess the nationwide
availability of sexual and reproductive health
services in order to identify underserved
areas and ensure appropriate funding; to
take measures to ensure that women have
access to legal abortion and post-abortion
services; and to introduce more rigorous
requirements to prevent blanket use of
conscientious objection in cases of abortion.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
UZBEKISTAN
Republic of Uzbekistan
Head of state: Shavkat Mirzioiev (replaced Islam
Karimov in September)
Head of government: Abdulla Aripov (replaced Shavkat
Mirzioiev in December)
Torture in detention centres and prisons
continued to be pervasive. The authorities
secured the return, including by secret
rendition, of hundreds of people they
suspected of criminal activity, of being in
opposition to the government or of being a
threat to national security; they were at risk
of torture. Forced labour was widely used.
The rights to freedom of expression and of
association remained severely restricted.
Human rights defenders continued to face
routine harassment and violence.
BACKGROUND
President Karimov died on 2 September, after
27 years in power. The authorities controlled
all information surrounding his death and
launched sustained attacks on social media
against independent news outlets and human
rights activists who criticized the late
President’s human rights record.
Prime Minister Mirzioiev, appointed acting
President in September, was elected
President on 4 December.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The authorities continued to categorically
deny reports of pervasive torture and other ill-
treatment by law enforcement officials. In
October, the Director of the National Centre
for Human Rights said that torture allegations
were based on fabricated evidence and
“clearly designed as a means of
disinformation... to put undue pressure” on
Uzbekistan. 1
Human rights defenders, former prisoners
and relatives of prisoners continued to
provide credible information that police and
National Security Service (NSS) officers
routinely used torture to coerce suspects,
391detainees and prisoners into confessing
crimes or incriminating others.
Judges continued to ignore or dismiss as
unfounded allegations of torture or other ill-
treatment, even when presented with
credible evidence.
In February, the Dzhizakh Regional
Criminal Court convicted fish farmer Aramais
Avakian and four co-defendants of plotting
anti-constitutional activities and of
membership of an “extremist organization”.
They were sentenced to between five and 12
years in prison.
Aramais Avakian consistently denied the
charges and told the court that NSS officers
had abducted him, held him incommunicado
for a month, tortured and forced him to
confess. They broke several of his ribs and
gave him electric shocks. In court, several of
the prosecution witnesses said that NSS
officers had detained and tortured them in
order to incriminate Aramais Avakian and his
co-defendants. During the appeal hearing in
March, his co-defendant Furkat Dzhuraev
told the judge that he, too, had been tortured.
The trial and appeal judges ignored all
allegations of torture and admitted the
defendants’ forced “confessions” as evidence
against them.
COUNTER-TERROR AND SECURITY
The authorities continued to secure the
return – through extradition proceedings or
otherwise – of numerous Uzbekistani
nationals they suspected of criminal activity,
or labelled as opponents or a threat to
national security.
Forced returns
In October, the authorities said they had
secured the return of 542 individuals
between January 2015 and July 2016.
The government offered assurances to the
authorities of the sending state saying that
independent monitors and diplomats would
have free and confidential access to
extradited individuals and that they would
receive a fair trial; in reality, access was
limited. In some cases it took up to a year for
diplomats to be granted permission to see a
392
detainee or prisoner, and they were generally
accompanied by officials, precluding
confidential conversations.
NSS officers continued the practice of
secret renditions (abducting wanted
individuals) from abroad. In Russia, local
security services were complicit in this
practice in those rare instances when the
Russian authorities refused to comply with
extradition requests.
Those abducted or otherwise forcibly
returned were subjected to incommunicado
detention, often in undisclosed locations,
and tortured or otherwise ill-treated to force
them to confess or incriminate others. In
many cases, security forces pressured
relatives not to seek support from human
rights organizations, and not to file
complaints about alleged human rights
violations.
On 4 March, Russian intelligence officers
apprehended asylum-seeker Sarvar Mardiev
as he was released from prison in Russia and
drove him away. His whereabouts were
undisclosed until October, when the
Uzbekistan authorities confirmed that Sarvar
Mardiev was detained in Kashkadaria the day
after his release from prison in Russia. They
said he was in pre-trial detention charged
with crimes against the state. He was not
granted access to a lawyer for a month.
Persecution of family members
The authorities increased pressure on
relatives of those suspected or convicted of
crimes against the state, including individuals
working or seeking protection abroad.
The authorities used the threat of bringing
charges of membership of a banned Islamist
group against a detained relative to prevent
families from exposing human rights
violations and seeking help from human
rights organizations at home and/or abroad.
Local mahalla (neighbourhood)
committees continued to collaborate with
security forces and local and national
authorities in closely monitoring residents of
their mahallas for any signs of behaviour or
activities considered improper, suspect or
illegal. Mahalla committees publicly exposed
Amnesty International Report 2016/17residents and their families and took punitive
action against them.
In February, mahalla members informed
the wife of Aramais Avakian that local
residents had decided to expel her and her
children from their neighbourhood because
of the “actions of her terrorist husband” and
because she had given interviews to foreign
journalists, slandered local officials and
brought Uzbekistan into disrepute.
FORCED LABOUR
Forced labour was used in the cotton
industry. International organizations
estimated that the authorities compelled over
a million public sector employees to work in
the cotton fields, in the preparation of the
fields in spring and the harvest in the
autumn. Uzbekistan was the world’s second
biggest user of modern-day slavery according
to the 2016 Global Slavery Index.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION –
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The rights to freedom of expression and
association remained severely restricted.
Activists who attempted to document the
use of forced labour in the cotton fields were
repeatedly detained and searched.
On 8 October, police and NSS officers
detained the head of the independent NGO
Human Rights Defenders’ Alliance of
Uzbekistan, Elena Urlaeva, and independent
photographer Timur Karpov as well as two
French activists in Buk District of Tashkent
Region. They were interviewing medical staff
and teachers sent to work in the cotton fields.
Elena Urlaeva reported that she was escorted
to an interrogation room in Buk police station
by a group of women, two of whom pulled
her by her hair, punched and verbally
insulted her. Police officers did not stop them
but instead threatened Elena Urlaeva and
refused to call medical assistance for her.
They released her without charges after six
hours. Timur Karpov was detained for 10
hours and threatened. Their recording
equipment and documentation materials
were confiscated.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
1. Uzbekistan: Fast-track to torture − abductions and forcible returns
from Russia to Uzbekistan (EUR 62/3740/2016)
VENEZUELA
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Head of state and government: Nicolás Maduro Moros
The government declared a state of
emergency which was renewed four times.
Most of those suspected of responsibility for
crimes under international law and for
human rights violations during the 2014
protests had yet to be brought to justice.
Prison overcrowding and violence
continued. Survivors of gender-based
violence faced significant obstacles in
accessing justice. Human rights defenders
and journalists frequently faced campaigns
to discredit them, as well as attacks and
intimidation. Political opponents and critics
of the government continued to face
imprisonment. There were reports of
excessive use of force by the police and
security forces.
BACKGROUND
On 15 January, President Maduro declared a
state of general emergency and economic
emergency which lasted the year. The
declaration established provisions which
could restrict the work of civil society and
NGOs, including by allowing the authorities to
audit signed agreements between national
organizations and legal entities with
companies or institutions based abroad.
The authorities failed to report on the
results of the implementation of the National
Human Rights Plan, which had been
approved in 2015.
Most of the judgments and orders passed
on Venezuela by the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights had yet to be complied with
by the end of the year.
Food and medicine shortages intensified
dramatically, provoking protests throughout
the country. In July, the executive announced
a new mandatory temporary work regime
393under which employees in public and private
companies could be transferred to state-run
food production companies, which would
amount to forced labour.
In October, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights stated that several Special
Rapporteurs had experienced difficulties in
visiting the country because the government
failed to grant them the relevant permits.
In November, Venezuela’s human rights
record was examined for the second time
under the UN Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) process.
There was concern that the temporary
nature of the positions held by more than
60% of judges made them susceptible to
political pressure. Contrary to international
human rights standards, civilians were tried
before military courts. Police forces refused
to comply with release orders issued by
courts.
The powers of the opposition-led National
Assembly were severely limited by resolutions
from the Supreme Court of Justice, which
hindered the ability of MPs to represent
Indigenous Peoples. The Court also annulled
a parliamentary declaration on non-
discrimination connected with sexual
orientation and gender identity; and a
declaration which called for compliance with
the decisions issued by intergovernmental
organizations.
IMPUNITY
The country’s withdrawal from the jurisdiction
of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
(in effect since 2013) continued to deny
victims of human rights violations and their
relatives access to justice, truth and
reparation.
Although two officials were convicted in
December of murdering Bassil Da Costa and
Geraldine Moreno during the 2014 protests,
progress was slow in bringing to justice those
suspected of criminal responsibility for the
killing of 41 other people – including security
force personnel – as well as the torture and
other ill-treatment of demonstrators during
the protests. The suspects included
members of the security forces. Information
394
provided by the Attorney General during the
UPR process revealed that nine officials had
been convicted of various crimes and that 18
others were under investigation, even though
298 investigations had been initiated the
previous year. However, the only official data
published by the Public Prosecutor’s Office
was about the conviction of one man for the
2014 murder of Adriana Urquiola in the city
of Los Teques, Miranda State.
According to a report presented to
Parliament by the Public Prosecutor’s Office
in January, over 11,000 reports of crimes
under international law and human rights
violations were received in 2015, while only
77 trials were initiated during that year. No
one had been brought to justice for the
killings of eight members of the Barrios family
or the threats and intimidation against other
family members in Aragua State since 1998.
Alcedo Mora Márquez, an employee of the
Government Secretariat in Merida State and a
community leader in the area, went missing
in February 2015. Before his disappearance,
he submitted reports on the misconduct of
local public officials.
In March, 28 miners disappeared in
Bolivar State; in October, the Public
Prosecutor’s Office presented a report
revealing that it had found the miners’
corpses and determined who was responsible
for their disappearance. Twelve people were
charged with murder, robbery and
“deprivation of liberty”. 1
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
There were continued reports of excessive
use of force by security forces, particularly in
the repression of protests over the lack of
food and medicine. In June, Jenny Ortiz
Gómez died as a result of several gunshots to
the head when police officers carried out
public order operations. The suspected
perpetrator was charged with intentional
homicide and misuse of firearms.
According to the Venezuelan Observatory
of Social Conflict, approximately 590 protests
were registered each month during the year.
The majority were related to demands for
Amnesty International Report 2016/17economic, social and cultural rights, in
particular access to food, health and housing.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
targeted with attacks and intimidation by
state media and high-ranking government
officials.
In April, Humberto Prado Sifontes, director
of the Venezuelan Prisons Observatory (OVP),
was once again the victim of threats and
insults when his email and social media
accounts were hacked following the
publication of an interview where he reported
on crisis and violence in the prison system. 2
In May, Rigoberto Lobo Puentes, a
member of the Human Rights Observatory of
the University of The Andes, was shot in the
head and back with a pellet gun by police
officers in Merida State, when tending to
injured victims during a protest. The officers
continued to shoot at him after he got into
his car.
In June, lawyers Raquel Sánchez and
Oscar Alfredo Ríos, members of the NGO
Venezuelan Penal Forum, were attacked by a
group of hooded assailants who smashed the
windscreen and side mirrors of their car
when they were travelling through Tachira
State. Raquel Sánchez was severely wounded
when she was hit on the head as she got out
of the car. 3
PRISON CONDITIONS
Prisons remained seriously overcrowded, and
despite the announcement concerning new
detention centres, prisoners’ living conditions
– including their access to food and health –
worsened. The presence of weapons held by
prisoners remained a problem which the
authorities failed to control. According to the
OVP, the number of prisoners exceeded
prison capacity by 190% in the first half of
the year. Local NGOs also denounced the
critical situation in pre-trial detention
facilities.
In March, 57 people – including four
inmates, a custodian and the prison director
– were injured at the Fenix Penitentiary
Centre in Lara State.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
In August, seven people were killed and
several others wounded by grenades during a
riot at the Aragua Penitentiary Centre.
In October, several inmates were evicted
from the General Penitentiary of Venezuela
after weeks of confrontation with the
Bolivarian National Guard, who allegedly
used excessive force in the confrontation.
The Office of the Ombudsman announced
a proposal to reduce overcrowding in pre-trial
detention facilities. According to its annual
report, presented to Parliament, 22,759
people remained in pre-trial detention in
police facilities, resulting in overcrowding and
the spread of diseases and violence.
ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Lawyer Marcelo Crovato remained under
house arrest at the end of the year. He had
been detained without trial in April 2014 for
defending residents whose houses had been
raided by the authorities during protests, and
was placed under house arrest in 2015.
Decisions of the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention had yet to be complied
with by the end of the year. They included
decisions on the cases of Daniel Ceballos and
Antonio Ledezma, two prominent government
critics.
In June, Francisco Márquez and Gabriel
San Miguel, two activists supporting the
opposition party Popular Will, were arrested
while on their way from the capital, Caracas,
to Portuguesa State to help organize electoral
activities. In August, Gabriel San Miguel was
freed following action taken by the Spanish
government, while Francisco Márquez was
freed in October.
Emilio Baduel Cafarelli and Alexander
Tirado Lara were transferred on three
occasions to detention centres known as
dangerous, prompting concern for their lives
and physical integrity. They had been
convicted of incitement, intimidation using
explosives and conspiracy to commit a crime
during the 2014 protests.
Opposition members Coromoto Rodríguez,
Yon Goicoechea, Alejandro Puglia and José
Vicente García were arrested in May, August,
September and October respectively, under
395circumstances which amounted to arbitrary
detention. Coromoto Rodríguez and Alejandro
Puglia were released in October.
In September, Andrés Moreno Febres-
Cordero, Marco Trejo, James Mathison and
César Cuellar were arrested and – despite
being civilians – were brought before a
military court for participating in the
production of a video for the political party
Justice First which had criticized the
government. 4 Marco Trejo and Andrés
Moreno Febres-Cordero were released in
November.
PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE
Political opponents of the government
continued to face imprisonment. In July, an
appeals court dismissed prisoner of
conscience Leopoldo López’s appeal against
his prison sentence, without taking into
account the absence of credible evidence to
support the charges and public statements
made before his conviction by the authorities,
thus seriously undermining his right to a fair
trial. He had been sentenced to 13 years and
nine months in prison.
According to the Venezuelan Criminal
Forum, more than 100 people remained in
detention due to political reasons.
In November, the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) activist and
prisoner of conscience Rosmit Mantilla was
released from jail. He had been imprisoned
since 2014. The circumstances and
conditions of his release remained unclear by
the end of the year.
POLICE AND SECURITY FORCES
Recent official data on homicides remained
unavailable. The Venezuelan Violence
Observatory reported that the country had the
second highest homicide rate in the
Americas.
In January, the Public Prosecutor’s Office
reported that investigations had been initiated
into 245 deaths which occurred in alleged
armed clashes with officials during the
government’s Operation Liberation and
Protection of the People (OLP), which had
been implemented by security forces in July
396
2015 to tackle the high crime rate. The high
number of civilian casualties suggested that
security forces may have used excessive
force or carried out extrajudicial executions.
On 15 October, 12 young people were
arbitrarily detained in the region of
Barlovento, in the state of Miranda, during an
OLP security operation. On 28 November
their bodies were found in two mass graves.
According to the Public Prosecutor’s Office,
18 members of the armed forces were
detained for their presumed participation in
the massacre.
The UN Human Rights Committee raised
concerns over reports of abuses by military
forces against Indigenous Peoples settled in
la Guajira, Zulia State, on the border
with Colombia.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to single out media
outlets and journalists critical of the
government.
In March, David Natera Febres, director of
the regional newspaper The Caroní Post, was
sentenced to four years in prison and fined
for publishing reports on corruption. The
sentence had yet to be implemented by the
end of the year.
In June, 17 journalists and media workers
who were covering protests in Caracas over
the lack of food were attacked and their
equipment stolen. The case was reported to
the Public Prosecutor’s Office to no avail.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Implementation of the 2007 legislation
criminalizing gender-based violence
remained slow due to a lack of resources; by
the end of the year there were still no shelters
available to victims seeking refuge.
Statistics from the Public Prosecutor’s
Office indicated that 121,168 complaints of
gender-based violence were received in
2015. Criminal proceedings were initiated in
19,816 cases and civil protection measures
such as restraining orders were granted in
less than 50% of cases. According to
women’s rights organizations, 96% of the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17cases that did reach the courts did not result
in convictions.
RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
In May, the National Assembly approved the
declaration of 17 May as the “Day against
Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia”.
In August, the Ministry of Interior and
Justice and the Public Prosecutor’s Office
agreed that transgender people could freely
express their gender identity on the
photograph on their identification documents.
However, there were no advances in
legislation to guarantee equal rights,
including to provide for the possibility for an
individual to adjust their name, gender and
other details in official documentation to
correspond to their gender identity, or to
criminalize hate crimes based on sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to contraceptives, including
emergency contraception, was increasingly
limited due to shortages of medicine.
Abortion continued to be criminalized in all
cases except when the life of the woman or
girl was at risk.
According to a report by the UN
Population Fund, the maternal mortality rate
in the country was 95 per 100,000 live births,
significantly higher than the regional average
of 68 deaths per 100,000 live births.
Contraceptive usage stood at 70% for
traditional methods and 64% for modern
methods, with regional averages at 73% and
67% respectively.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The legal provisions to guarantee and
regulate consultation with Indigenous
Peoples over matters affecting their
livelihoods were not complied with. There
were reports of criminalization of Indigenous
and environmental rights defenders. Concern
was raised over the impact on Indigenous
land and environment of large-scale mining
projects in the southern region of Venezuela
known as the Mining Arc. Approval for the
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
implementation of the projects was granted
without consulting with and seeking the free,
prior and informed consent of Indigenous
communities in the area.
RIGHT TO HEALTH – LACK OF FOOD
AND MEDICINE
The economic and social crisis in the country
continued to worsen. In light of the lack of
official statistics, private and independent
agencies such as the Workers’ Centre for
Documentation and Analysis (CENDA)
reported an inflation of 552% for food
products from November 2015 to October
2016, which made it extremely difficult for
the population to purchase food even when
they were able to find it. According to the
Venezuelan Health Observatory, 12.1% of the
population ate only twice a day or less. The
Bengoa Foundation for Food and Nutrition
estimated that 25% of children were
malnourished.
Studies on living conditions carried out by
three major universities revealed that 73% of
homes in the country suffered from income
poverty in 2015, while official data from the
National Institute of Statistics put that figure
at 33.1%.
The government’s refusal to allow
international aid efforts to address the
humanitarian crisis and provide medicine
exacerbated the critical health situation. The
poor state of public health services led to an
increase in preventable and treatable
diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis.
NGOs such as the Coalition of Organizations
for the Right to Life and Health and
professional associations calculated that
there was a shortage of 75% of high-cost
drugs and 90% of essential drugs.
1. Venezuela: Establish the whereabouts of missing miners (AMR
53/3602/2016)
2. Venezuela: Human rights defender threatened: Humberto Prado
Sifontes (AMR 53/3952/2016)
3. Venezuela: Human rights defenders assaulted (AMR 53/4223/2016)
4. Venezuela: Arrested and prosecuted by military tribunal (AMR
53/5029/2016)
397VIET NAM
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
Head of state: Tran Dai Quang (replaced Truong Tan
Sang in April)
Head of government: Nguyen Xuan Phuc (replaced
Nguyen Tan Dung in April)
Severe restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression, of association and of
peaceful assembly continued. The media
and the judiciary, as well as political and
religious institutions, remained under state
control. Prisoners of conscience were
tortured and otherwise ill-treated, and
subjected to unfair trials. Physical attacks
against human rights defenders continued,
and prominent activists were subjected to
daily surveillance and harassment. Peaceful
dissidents and government critics were
arrested and convicted on national security
charges. Demonstrations were repressed,
with participants and organizers arrested
and tortured. The death penalty was
retained.
BACKGROUND
The five-yearly leadership change took place
in January at the congress of the Communist
Party of Viet Nam. In May, a general election
for the 500 seats in the National Assembly
was contested by 900 Communist Party
members nominated by central or local
authorities and 11 independent candidates.
Over 100 non-party candidates who
attempted to register, including prominent
government critics such as Nguyễn Quang A,
were disqualified on tenuous administrative
grounds. Some were subject to harassment
and intimidation.
The implementation of key new laws,
scheduled for July, was postponed due to
flaws in the amended Penal Code. They
included the Criminal Procedure Code, the
Law on the Organization of Criminal
Investigation Agencies, the Law on the
Implementation of Custody and Temporary
Detention, and the amended Penal Code
itself.
398
REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Peaceful criticism of government policies
continued to be silenced through judicial and
extra-legal means. There was extensive
surveillance and harassment of activists,
including those who demonstrated against
the Formosa ecological disaster which
affected the lives of an estimated 270,000
people (see below). Attacks against human
rights defenders were commonplace. 1
The authorities continued to use vaguely
worded legislation to convict peaceful
activists under the national security section of
the 1999 Penal Code, in particular: Article
258 “abusing democratic freedoms to
infringe upon the interests of the state, the
legitimate rights and interests of organizations
and/or citizens”; Article 88 “spreading
propaganda against the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam”; and Article 79 “carrying out
activities aimed at overthrowing the people’s
administration”.
In an eight-day period in March, seven
activists and government critics were
convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for
the peaceful expression of their views. They
included Nguyễn Hữu Vinh, founder of the
popular blog site Anh Ba Sàm, and his
assistant Nguyễn Thi Minh Thúy who were
convicted under Article 258 and given five-
and three-year prison sentences
respectively. 2 They had spent nearly two
years in pre-trial detention.
Prominent human rights lawyer Nguyễn
Văn Đài and his assistant Lê Thu Hà
remained in incommunicado detention
following their arrest on charges under Article
88 in December 2015. 3
In October, well-known activist Nguyễn
Ngọc Như Quỳnh, known as blogger Mẹ
Nấm (Mother Mushroom), was arrested on
charges under Article 88 in connection with
her blog postings criticizing the government. 4
The Article carries a three- to 20-year prison
sentence.
Routine beatings of human rights
defenders and their relatives continued. In
April, Trần Thị Hồng, wife of prisoner of
conscience Pastor Nguyễn Công Chính, was
Amnesty International Report 2016/17arrested and severely beaten in custody soon
after she met with a US delegation visiting
Viet Nam. 5
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Large peaceful demonstrations over the
Formosa disaster were frequent. Weekly
demonstrations in urban centres around the
country in April and May resulted in mass
arrests and attacks against participants by
police and individuals in plain clothes
believed to be police or working under police
orders. Many of those detained were tortured
or otherwise ill-treated, including with
beatings and the use of electric shocks. 6
Demonstrations continued throughout the
year, with those in provinces affected by the
Formosa disaster gathering momentum.
There were reports that 30,000 people
demonstrated in August in Vinh City, Nghệ
An province.
LAND DISPUTES
In July, a demonstration of around 400 ethnic
minority Ede villagers in Buôn Ma Thuột, Đắk
Lắk province protesting against the sale of
100 hectares of the community’s ancestral
land to a private company was violently
repressed by security forces; at least seven
demonstrators were arrested and held in
incommunicado detention. 7
In August, land activist Cấn Thị Thêu was
convicted under Article 245 of “causing
public disorder” by a court in the capital Ha
Noi and sentenced to 20 months’
imprisonment. 8 She was accused of inciting
protests against reclamation of land in Hà
Đông district, Ha Noi, by posting photographs
online.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment, including
incommunicado detention, prolonged solitary
confinement, beatings, withholding of
medical treatment, and punitive transfers
between facilities were practised on prisoners
of conscience throughout the country. 9 At
least 88 prisoners of conscience were held in
harsh conditions after unfair trials, some of
whom were subjected to beatings, prolonged
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
solitary confinement, deprivation of medical
treatment and electric shocks. They included
bloggers, labour and land rights activists,
political activists, religious followers,
members of ethnic groups and advocates for
human rights and social justice.
Land rights activist Bùi Thị Minh Hằng,
and Hòa Hảo Buddhist Trần Thị Thúy
continued to be denied adequate medical
treatment since 2015; Catholic activist Đặng
Xuân Diệu was held in solitary confinement
for prolonged periods and tortured; and Trần
Huỳnh Duy Thức had been transferred
between several prisons since 2009,
apparently as a punishment or to intimidate
him.
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In April and May, in two separate cases, eight
asylum-seekers among groups intercepted en
route to Australia and forcibly returned to Viet
Nam were sentenced to between two and
four years’ imprisonment under Article 275 of
the Penal Code for “organizing and/or
coercing other persons to flee abroad or to
stay abroad illegally”. 10
RIGHT TO AN ADEQUATE STANDARD
OF LIVING
An ecological disaster in early April killed
huge numbers of fish stocks along the coast
of Nghệ An, Hà Tĩnh, Quảng Bình, Quảng Trị
and Thừa Thiên-Huế provinces, affecting the
livelihoods of 270,000 people. After a two-
month investigation, the authorities
confirmed allegations by the public that a
steel plant owned by the Taiwanese Formosa
Plastics Group had caused toxic waste
discharges. At the end of June, Formosa
publicly acknowledged responsibility and
announced that it would provide
compensation of US$500 million. In October,
a court in Hà Tĩnh rejected 506 cases filed by
those affected. The plaintiffs were calling for
increased compensation in damages for the
impact on their livelihoods.
DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed,
including for drug-related offences. Official
399statistics remained classified as a state
secret. Death sentences were reported in the
media. There was no available information
about executions.
1. Viet Nam: Crackdown on human rights amidst Formosa related
activism (ASA 41/5104/2016)
2. Viet Nam: Convictions of Nguyễn Hữu Vinh and Nguyễn Thị Minh
Thúy are an outrageous contravention of freedom of expression (ASA
41/3702/2016)
3. Ending torture of prisoners of conscience in Viet Nam (News story, 12
July)
4. Viet Nam: Vietnamese human rights blogger arrested (ASA
41/4979/2016)
5. Viet Nam: Detained pastor on hunger strike since 8 August (ASA
41/4759/2016)
6. Viet Nam: Government cracks down on peaceful demonstrations with
range of rights violations, including torture and other ill-treatment
(ASA 41/4078/2016)
7. Viet Nam: Minority group’s protest met with violence (ASA
41/4509/2016)
8. Viet Nam: Failing to uphold human rights as land rights activist
sentenced to 20 months in prison (ASA 41/4866/2016)
9. Prisons within prisons: Torture and ill-treatment of prisoners of
conscience in Viet Nam (ASA 41/4187/2016)
10. Viet Nam: Imprisonment of asylum-seeker forcibly returned by
Australia would be unlawful and could be disastrous for her young
children (ASA 41/4653/2016)
YEMEN
Republic of Yemen
Head of state: Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi
Head of government: Ahmed Obeid bin Daghr (replaced
Khaled Bahah in April)
All parties to the continuing armed conflict
committed war crimes and other serious
violations of international law with impunity.
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition supporting
the internationally recognized Yemeni
government bombed hospitals and other
civilian infrastructure and carried out
indiscriminate attacks, killing and injuring
civilians. The Huthi armed group and forces
allied to it indiscriminately shelled civilian
residential areas in Ta’iz city and fired
artillery indiscriminately across the border
into Saudi Arabia, killing and injuring
civilians. Huthi and allied forces severely
400
curtailed the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly in areas they controlled, arbitrarily
arresting critics and opponents, including
journalists and human rights defenders,
forcing NGOs to close. They subjected some
detainees to enforced disappearance and to
torture and other ill-treatment. Women and
girls continued to face entrenched
discrimination and other abuses, including
forced marriage and domestic violence. The
death penalty remained in force; no
information was publicly available on death
sentences or executions.
BACKGROUND
The armed conflict between the
internationally recognized government of
President Hadi, supported by a Saudi Arabia-
led international coalition, and the Huthi
armed group and allied forces, which
included army units loyal to former President
Ali Abdullah Saleh, continued to rage
throughout the year. The Huthis and forces
allied to former President Saleh continued to
control the capital, Sana’a, and other areas.
President Hadi’s government controlled
southern parts of Yemen including the
governorates of Lahj and Aden.
The armed group al-Qa’ida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) continued to control parts
of southern Yemen and to carry out bomb
attacks in Aden and in the port city of al-
Mukallah, which government forces
recaptured from AQAP in April. US forces
continued to target AQAP forces with missile
strikes. The armed group Islamic State (IS)
also carried out bomb attacks in Aden and al-
Mukallah, mostly targeting government
officials and forces.
According to the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, 4,125
civilians, including more than 1,200 children,
had been killed and more than 7,000
civilians wounded since the conflict began in
March 2015. The UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
reported that more than 3.27 million people
had been forcibly displaced in the conflict by
October and nearly 21.2 million people, 80%
Amnesty International Report 2016/17of the population, relied on humanitarian
assistance.
In April, UN-sponsored peace negotiations
between the parties to the conflict began in
Kuwait, accompanied by a brief lull in
hostilities. Fighting intensified after the
negotiations collapsed on 6 August. On 25
August, US Secretary of State John Kerry
announced a “renewed approach to
negotiations”; this had produced no clear
outcome by the end of the year.
Huthi and allied forces appointed a 10-
member Supreme Political Council to rule
Yemen, which in turn appointed former Aden
Governor Abdulaziz bin Habtoor to lead a
government of “national salvation”. In
September, President Hadi ordered the
Central Bank to move from Sana’a to Aden,
deepening the fiscal crisis caused by the
depletion of its reserves and the
humanitarian crisis by curtailing the ability of
the de facto Huthi administration in Sana’a to
import essential food, fuel and medical
supplies.
ARMED CONFLICT
Violations by armed groups
Huthi and allied forces, including army units
loyal to former President Saleh, repeatedly
carried out violations of international
humanitarian law, including indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks. They
endangered civilians in areas they controlled
by launching attacks from the vicinity of
schools, hospitals and homes, exposing
residents to attacks by pro-government
forces, including aerial bombing by the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition. They also
indiscriminately fired explosive munitions that
affect a wide area, including mortars and
artillery shells, into residential areas
controlled or contested by opposing forces,
particularly in Ta’iz city, killing and injuring
civilians. By November, Huthi and allied
forces had reportedly carried out at least 45
unlawful attacks in Ta’iz, killing and injuring
scores of civilians. One attack on 4 October
killed 10 civilians, including six children, and
injured 17 others in a street near the Bir
Basha market, the UN reported. The Huthis
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
and their allies also continued to lay
internationally banned anti-personnel
landmines that caused civilian casualties,
and to recruit and deploy child soldiers. In
June, the UN Secretary-General reported that
the Huthis were responsible for 72% of 762
verified cases of recruitment of child soldiers
during the conflict.
In Sana’a and other areas they controlled,
the Huthis and their allies arbitrarily arrested
and detained critics and opponents as well as
journalists, human rights defenders and
members of the Baha’i community,
subjecting scores to enforced disappearance.
Many arrests were carried out by armed men
belonging to Ansarullah, the Huthi political
wing, at homes, workplaces, checkpoints or
public venues such as mosques. Such
arrests were carried out without judicial
warrant or stated reasons, and without
disclosing where those arrested were being
taken or would be held.
Many detainees were held in unofficial
locations such as private homes without
being told the reason for their imprisonment
or allowed any means to challenge its legality,
including access to lawyers and the courts.
Some were subjected to enforced
disappearance and held in secret locations;
Huthi authorities refused to acknowledge
their detention, disclose any information
about them or allow them access to legal
counsel and their families. Some detainees
were subjected to torture or other ill-
treatment. In February, one family reported
seeing guards beat their relative at the
Political Security Office detention facility
in Sana’a.
Anti-Huthi forces and their allies led a
campaign of harassment and intimidation
against hospital staff, and endangered
civilians by stationing fighters and military
positions near medical facilities, particularly
during fighting in the southern city of Ta’iz. At
least three hospitals were shut down due to
threats against their staff.
The Huthis and their allies also curtailed
freedom of association in areas under their
de facto administration.
401Violations by the Saudi Arabia-led coalition
The international coalition supporting
President Hadi’s government continued to
commit serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law with
impunity. The coalition’s partial sea and air
blockade further curtailed the import of food
and other necessities, deepening the
humanitarian crisis caused by the conflict,
and prevented commercial flights to Sana’a.
Coalition aircraft carried out bomb attacks
on areas controlled or contested by Huthi
forces and their allies, particularly in the
Sana’a, Hajjah, Hodeidah and Sa’da
governorates, killing and injuring thousands
of civilians. Many coalition attacks were
directed at military targets, but others were
indiscriminate, disproportionate or directed
against civilians and civilian objects,
including funeral gatherings, hospitals,
schools, markets and factories. Some
coalition attacks targeted key infrastructure,
including bridges, water facilities and
telecommunication towers. One attack in
August destroyed the main road bridge
between Sana’a and Hodeidah. Some
coalition attacks amounted to war crimes.
In August, the humanitarian NGO
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said it had
lost “confidence in the Coalition’s ability to
avoid such fatal attacks”. MSF withdrew its
staff from six hospitals in northern Yemen
after coalition aircraft bombed an MSF-
supported hospital for the fourth time in a
year, killing 19 people and injuring 24. In
early December, the Joint
Incidents Assessment Team (JIAT) created by
the Saudi Arabia-led coalition to investigate
alleged violations by its forces concluded that
the strike was an “unintentional error”. The
JIAT public statement contradicted MSF’s
own investigations which found that the
incident was not the result of an error, but
rather of hostilities conducted “with disregard
for the protected nature of hospitals and
civilian structures”.
On 21 September a coalition air strike on a
residential area of Hodeidah city killed 26
civilians, including seven children, and
402
injured 24 others, according to the UN. On 8
October, a coalition air strike killed more than
100 people attending a funeral gathering in
Sana’a and injured more than 500 others.
The coalition initially denied responsibility for
the 8 October attack but admitted liability
after it was condemned internationally, and
said the attack had been based on “incorrect
information” and that those responsible
would be disciplined.
Coalition forces also used imprecise
munitions in some attacks, including large
bombs made in the USA and the UK that
have a wide impact radius and cause
casualties and destruction beyond their
immediate strike location. The coalition
forces also continued to use cluster
munitions made in the USA and the UK in
attacks in Sa’da and Hajjah governorates
although such munitions were widely
prohibited internationally because of their
inherently indiscriminate nature. Cluster
munitions scattered explosive bomblets over
a wide area and presented a continuing risk
because of their frequent failure to detonate
on initial impact. In December the coalition
admitted that its forces had used UK-
manufactured cluster munitions in 2015 and
stated that it would not do so in the future.
IMPUNITY
All parties to the armed conflict committed
serious violations of international law with
impunity. The Huthis and their allies took no
steps to investigate serious violations by their
forces and hold those responsible to account.
The National Commission of Inquiry,
established by President Hadi in September
2015, had its mandate extended for another
year in August. It conducted some
investigations but lacked independence and
impartiality; it was unable to access large
parts of the country, and focused almost
entirely on violations by the Huthis and their
allies.
The JIAT created by the Saudi Arabia-led
coalition to investigate alleged violations by its
forces was also seriously flawed. It did not
disclose details of its mandate, methodology
or powers, including how it determines which
Amnesty International Report 2016/17incidents to investigate, conducts
investigations, or verifies information; nor
what status its recommendations carry either
with coalition commanders or member states.
LACK OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
All parties to the conflict exacerbated the
suffering of civilians by restricting the
provision of humanitarian assistance. Huthi
forces and their allies continued to curtail the
entry of food and vital medical supplies into
Ta’iz, Yemen’s third most populous city,
throughout the year, exposing thousands of
civilians to further suffering. Elsewhere,
humanitarian workers accused Huthi security
officials of imposing arbitrary and excessive
restrictions on their movement of goods and
staff, seeking to compromise the
independence of aid operations, and forcibly
closing some humanitarian aid programmes.
Humanitarian aid workers accused the
Saudi Arabia-led coalition of hampering the
delivery of humanitarian assistance by
imposing excessively burdensome
procedures that required them to inform the
coalition of their planned operations in
advance, in order to avoid possible attack.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
The armed conflict caused massive civilian
displacement, particularly in the Ta’iz, Hajjah
and Sana’a governorates. In October, the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported that some 3.27 million
people, half of them children, were internally
displaced within Yemen, an increase of more
than 650,000 since December 2015.
INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
The UN Panel of Experts on Yemen released
its final report on 26 January. The Panel
concluded that all parties to the conflict had
repeatedly attacked civilians and civilian
objects, documenting “119 coalition sorties
relating to violations of international
humanitarian law”, including many that
“involved multiple air strikes on multiple
civilian objects”. A subsequent report to the
UN Security Council by a new Panel of
Experts, leaked in August, accused all parties
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
to the conflict of violating international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
In June, the UN Secretary-General
removed the Saudi Arabia-led coalition from
an annual list of states and armed groups
that violate the rights of children in armed
conflict after the Saudi Arabian government
threatened to cease funding key UN
programmes.
In August, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights called for the establishment of
an “international, independent body to carry
out comprehensive investigations in Yemen”.
However, the UN Human Rights Council
resolved in September that the High
Commissioner would continue providing
technical support to the National Commission
established in 2015 and allocate additional
international experts to their Yemen office.
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women and girls continued to face
discrimination in law and in practice and
were inadequately protected against sexual
and other violence, including female genital
mutilation, forced marriage and other abuses.
DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for
many crimes; no information was publicly
available about death sentences or
executions.
ZAMBIA
Republic of Zambia
Head of state and government: Edgar Chagwa Lungu
A contested presidential election was
marked by increased political violence. The
authorities used the Public Order Act to
repress the rights to freedom of expression,
assembly and association; the police used
excessive force to disperse meetings of
opposition parties. The authorities cracked
down on independent media outlets and
harassed journalists. In April, there was a
403wave of xenophobic violence against foreign
nationals.
BACKGROUND
Edgar Chagwa Lungu was returned as
President in an election on 11 August which
saw increased tension and violence, primarily
between members of the ruling Patriotic
Front and the opposition United Party for
National Development (UPND). The election
was held under a new Constitution
promulgated on 5 January following a
controversial process.
The UPND questioned the independence
of the judiciary after a UPND petition was
dismissed without being heard by three
Constitutional Court judges who took the
decision without involving two other
Constitutional Court judges.
A constitutional referendum held on 11
August at the same time as the general
election failed to gain the votes required to
amend the country’s bill of rights.
In April, there was a wave of xenophobic
violence against foreign nationals in
Zingalume and George Compounds following
allegations of ritual killings. Shops belonging
to Rwandan and Zimbabwean nationals were
looted. Two Zambian nationals were burned
to death in the xenophobic attacks. The
alleged perpetrators were arrested and
convicted of murder.
The Global Hunger Index of 2016 ranked
Zambia as the third hungriest country in the
world, with nearly half of the population
undernourished.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities used the Public Order Act,
enacted in 1955, selectively; they arbitrarily
restricted the right to freedom of assembly for
opposition political parties. Police used
excessive force to disperse crowds. On 8
July, police used live ammunition to disperse
protesters in Chawama Township in the
capital Lusaka, killing Mapenzi Chibulo, a
young woman UPND supporter.
On 5 October, UPND leaders Hakainde
Hichilema and Geoffrey Mwamba were
arrested and charged with unlawful assembly
404
and seditious practices following a brief
meeting with party supporters at a village in
Mpongwe District. 1 They were released on
bail pending trial in October.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 21 March, Eric Chanda, leader of the
Fourth Revolution political party, was arrested
and charged with defaming the President
in 2015.
On 20 June, the printing presses of The
Post newspaper were seized by the tax
authorities and its operations shut down. On
27 June, police beat and arrested editor-in-
chief Fred M’membe and his wife Mutinta
Mazoka-M’membe, and deputy managing-
editor Joseph Mwenda. The charges against
them included breaking into The Post
building.
On 22 August, the Zambian Independent
Broadcasting Authority (IBA) suspended the
licences of three independent broadcasters –
Muvi TV, Komboni Radio and Radio Itezhi.
Four Muvi TV media workers − John
Nyendwa, Mubanga Katyeka, Joe Musakanya
and William Mwenge – who had reported for
work were arrested and charged with criminal
trespass. The licences were subsequently
reinstated.
Despite the reinstatement of Komboni
Radio’s licence, on 5 October the station’s
director, Lesa Kasoma Nyirenda, was beaten
by six armed policemen who prevented her
from accessing the premises. She was also
charged with assaulting a police officer.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In March the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child issued its concluding observations
on Zambia. The Committee expressed
concern that vulnerable children were being
denied equal access to a range of services
including health and education. Under-five
and infant mortality rates remained high
while adolescents lacked access to adequate
reproductive health services and information.
The Committee also highlighted the
imposition of primary school fees and the
high dropout rates for girls due to
Amnesty International Report 2016/17discriminatory traditional attitudes and the
exclusion of pregnant girls.
1. Zambia: Drop sedition charges against opposition leaders (Press
release, 19 October)
ZIMBABWE
Republic of Zimbabwe
Head of state and government: Robert Gabriel Mugabe
Activists and human rights defenders
mobilized to hold the government to
account for increasing corruption,
unemployment, poverty and inequality. In
the face of increasing activism, the
authorities intensified the crackdown on
government critics, imposing blanket bans
on protest in central Harare, the capital,
and detaining journalists and activists,
some of whom were tortured.
BACKGROUND
A report by the Zimbabwe Vulnerability
Assessment Committee released in July
stated that approximately 4.1 million people
would experience food insecurity between
January and March 2017 following a drought
caused by El Niño.
Cash shortages left the government
struggling to pay civil servants their monthly
salaries, leading to government proposals to
introduce bond notes. The fear of bond notes
becoming a worthless currency and returning
the country to the unpopular period of
hyperinflation similar to 2008 sparked
continuous protest up to December.
In June, the government introduced
Statutory Instrument SI64 in a desperate bid
to curb cheap imports and promote domestic
manufacturing, sparking protests by those
opposed to the measure.
Tensions in the ruling Zimbabwe African
National Union – Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF)
party continued to affect the functioning of
government.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government sought to stifle critical
reporting in the privately owned media.
In January, the Permanent Secretary of the
Ministry of Media, Information and
Broadcasting Services (MIMBS), George
Charamba, threatened the privately owned
media with arrests if they reported on
factional strife within ZANU-PF. His
comments followed the arrest in January of
three members of staff of Newsday: Nqaba
Matshazi, deputy editor; Xolisani Ncube, a
reporter; and Sifikile Thabete, the legal
assistant. The two journalists were charged
with publishing falsehoods. At the end of the
year, their trial was pending a decision by the
Constitutional Court on the validity of the law
used to arrest them.
In February, while attending World Radio
Day commemorations, Anywhere
Mutambudzi, Director of Urban
Communications within the MIMBS,
threatened to clamp down on community
radio initiatives, accusing them of operating
illegally. The government has failed to license
a single community radio station since the
enactment of the Broadcasting Services Act
(2001).
Journalists
Journalists faced harassment, arrest and
assault while covering protests. The Media
Institute of Southern Africa (MISA) recorded
assaults on 32 journalists between January
and September.
Paidamoyo Muzulu, a Newsday journalist,
was arrested and detained in June together
with 15 other activists who were holding a
protest vigil in Africa Unity Square in Harare.
He was charged with robbery and obstructing
or defeating the course of justice. The
activists were charged with robbery and
resisting arrest. All were released on bail
pending trial at the end of the year.
Five journalists were arrested while
covering demonstrations against the Vice-
President’s lengthy stay in the five star
Rainbow Towers Hotel. They were detained
405for six hours before being released without
charge.
Freelancer Godwin Mangudya and three
Alpha Media Holding (AMH) journalists –
Elias Mambo, Tafadzwa Ufumeli and Richard
Chidza – were briefly detained at the
Marimba police station for covering protests
in the suburb of Mufakose on 6 July. Police
officers released them after ordering them to
delete images of the protests.
Mugove Tafirenyika, a journalist with the
Daily News, was assaulted at the ZANU-PF
headquarters by party supporters on 27 July
while covering a war veterans’ meeting.
On 3 August, seven journalists – Lawrence
Chimunhu and Haru Mutasa of Al Jazeera,
and Tsvangirayi Mukwazhi, Christopher
Mahove, Tendayi Musiya, Bridget Mananavire
and Imelda Mhetu – were assaulted by police
while covering demonstrations against
government plans to introduce bond notes.
All seven were released without charge.
On 24 August, freelance journalist Lucy
Yasin was assaulted by riot police while
covering a march by the opposition
Movement for Democratic Change (MDC-T)
and Tendai Mandimika, a freelance journalist,
was arrested and charged with public
violence.
On 31 August, Crispen Ndlovu, a
Bulawayo-based freelance photojournalist,
was arrested and assaulted by riot police for
taking pictures of police as they assaulted
Alfred Dzirutwe in Bulawayo. He was charged
with criminal nuisance and beaten up in a
truck and later admitted to a private hospital
for treatment of the injuries sustained.
In August, security and intelligence officers
dressed in military attire made several visits
to Trevor Ncube, the publisher of Alpha
Media Holdings (AMH), in a clear attempt to
intimidate him.
Social media
The authorities attempted to stifle social
media.
In April, President Mugabe threatened to
introduce laws to restrict access to the
internet.
406
In August, in response to the rising
discontent expressed on social media, the
authorities introduced a draft bill on
Computer and Cyber Crimes to curb anti-
government criticism. The bill had not
become law by the end of the year.
During a national stay-away on 6 July in
protest against corruption, fronted by the
social media movement #ThisFlag, social
media apps such as WhatsApp were shut
down by the government.
REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Activists and human rights defenders were
subjected to intimidation, harassment and
arrests by the authorities and the youth wing
of the ruling ZANU-PF party with impunity.
In July alone, 332 people were arrested in
connection with anti-government protests.
Hundreds were arrested across the country
for participating in demonstrations organized
by the National Electoral Reform Agenda
(NERA), a coalition of 18 political parties
campaigning for electoral reform. Organizers
of the protests were assaulted the night
before the demonstrations.
During celebrations of Independence Day
in April, state security agents brutally
assaulted and arrested Patson Dzamara for
staging a one-man demonstration by raising a
placard in front of President Mugabe. He was
protesting the abduction and disappearance
of his brother, Itai Dzamara, in March 2015.
Patson Dzamara was later released without
charge. However, in November, he was
abducted by armed men shortly before an
anti-government protest and severely beaten.
About 105 people were arrested and
charged with public violence when workers
on commuter omnibuses went on strike on 4
July in Bulawayo and Harare and barricaded
roads with stones and burning tyres. They
were later released on bail.
Evan Mawarire, leader of the #ThisFlag
movement, was arrested by police on 12 July
and charged with inciting public violence.
While in court, the state changed the charges
to “subverting a constitutionally elected
government”. He was released after the
magistrate ruled the change of charges illegal
Amnesty International Report 2016/17and unconstitutional. However, Evan
Mawarire left the country in July following
continued state persecution.
In August, pictures emerged of a 62-year-
old woman, Lillian Chinyerere Shumba, being
brutally beaten by riot police outside the
Harare Magistrates’ Court. The authorities
also arrested Sten Zvorwadza, Chairperson of
the National Vendors Union of Zimbabwe
(NAVUZ), and Promise Mkwananzi,
spokesperson for the Tajamuka/Sesjikile
(“We’ve had enough”), campaign, and
charged them with inciting public violence.
The unprecedented clampdown on former
allies of ZANU-PF intensified following the
publication of a communiqué by the
Zimbabwe National Liberation War Veterans
Association renouncing President Mugabe’s
leadership and blaming him for the
deteriorating economic situation. Police
arrested five war veterans and charged them
with undermining the authority of or insulting
the President in contravention of section
33(2) of the Criminal Law Act. All five were
released on bail and their trials were
indefinitely postponed at the end of the year.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
President Mugabe launched an attack on the
judiciary following significant judgments that
upheld the right to protest. He criticized the
country’s judges, labelling them “reckless”
and warning them not to be negligent.
In September, in response to an increasing
number of demonstrations, police imposed a
two-week ban on protests in Harare Central
District under Statutory Instrument 101 A.
However, a High Court judge lifted the ban,
declaring it to be unconstitutional. 1
On 16 September, police imposed a one-
month ban on protests in central Harare
under Government Notice No.239 A of 2016.
An appeal to set aside this ban was
dismissed by the courts. 2
On 29 September, three students at the
University of Zimbabwe – Tonderai Dombo,
Andile Mqenqele and Zibusiso Tshuma –
were arrested for raising placards in front of
President Mugabe demanding jobs during
the university’s annual graduation ceremony.
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
They were charged with criminal nuisance
and fined US$10.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Activists reported cases of attempted
abductions by unidentified armed groups
often linked to state security forces. These
took place either during the night or just
before a planned demonstration. Some of
those abducted and taken to ZANU-PF
headquarters were subjected to torture
including sexual violence.
On 13 September, Silvanos Mudzvova, a
well-known actor, director and activist and
member of Tajamuka/Sesjikile, was abducted
from his home at night by six armed men
alleged to be state security agents. He was
blindfolded and taken to an area near Lake
Chivero where he was tortured. He was
injected with an unknown substance and left
for dead. He required hospital treatment for
the serious injuries sustained, which included
abdominal trauma, and was still recovering at
the end of the year.
Unidentified men travelling in five vehicles
abducted Kudakwashe Kambakunje, NAVUZ
Chairperson for the Central Business District,
on 27 September in Harare. He was later
found 22km outside the city, badly wounded.
He had been severely beaten and injected
with an unknown substance.
In September, pictures emerged of serious
lacerations sustained by Esther Mutsiru and
Gladys Musingo while in police custody in
Harare. The women had been detained and
tortured after participating in a NERA
demonstration.
Activist and public relations officer for the
Rural Teachers’ Union of Zimbabwe Ostallos
Siziba was abducted on 26 August in the
lead-up to the NERA demonstrations. He was
taken to ZANU-PF headquarters where he
was severely beaten. He stated that his
abductors tried to force him to have sex with
an elderly woman, but he refused. He was
later handed over to Harare Central Police
station, charged with public violence and
released on bail.
407CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL
DEVELOPMENTS
In January the Constitutional Court outlawed
child marriage by setting a minimum age for
marriage at 18 years.
In February, the Constitutional Court ruled
the criminal defamation law to be invalid and
unconstitutional.
DEATH PENALTY
Nyikavanhu Housing Cooperative without
following due process, including consultation
and adequate notice. The demolitions took
place after President Mugabe ordered the
relocation of the settlers.
1. Zimbabwe: Allow public demonstrations as per court ruling (News
story, 7 September)
2. Zimbabwe: Court ruling upholding police ban on protests must be
rescinded (News story, 5 October)
In its report to the UN Universal Periodic
Review (UPR), the government revealed that
10 death row inmates had been pardoned
during the year after they requested
clemency.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
In January, following its review of Zimbabwe’s
second periodic report, the UN Committee on
the Rights of the Child noted the negative
impact of the severe economic decline on the
delivery of services to children. The
Committee expressed serious concern about
the high rates of maternal, neonatal and child
mortality; malnutrition among children under
the age of five; and the significant number of
deaths of children under five owing to
inadequate sanitation and the lack of clean
drinking water.
In the context of continuing widespread
food insecurity, particularly among poor
households in the south of the country, the
Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission
criticized the government for partisan
distribution of food aid and agricultural
subsidies in five districts.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
expressed extreme concern about the high
rate of sexual violence experienced by
adolescent girls as well as early pregnancy
and child marriage and its correlation with
the school dropout rate of adolescent girls.
HOUSING RIGHTS
On 21 January, Harare City Council
demolished over 100 houses in Arlington
Estate belonging to members of the
408
Amnesty International Report 2016/17
